  Weapon Identification Across Varying Acoustic Conditions Using an
                   Exemplar Embedding Approach

                          Saad Khan, Ajay Divakaran, and Harpreet S. Sawhney
                  Sarnoff Corporation, 201 Washington Road, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA


                                                      ABSTRACT

Gunshot recordings have the potential for both tactical detection and forensic evaluation particularly to ascertain
information about the type of firearm and ammunition used. Perhaps the most significant challenge to such an analysis is
the effect of recording conditions on the audio signature of recorded data. In this paper we present a first study of using
an exemplar embedding approach to automatically detect and classify firearm type across different recording conditions.
We demonstrate that a small number of exemplars can span the space of gunshot audio signatures and that this optimal
set can be obtained using a wrapper function. By projecting a given gunshot to the subspace spanned by the exemplar set
a distance measure/feature vector is obtained that enables comparisons across recording conditions. We also investigate
the use of a hierarchy of gunshot classifications that assists in improving finer level classification by pruning out gunshot
labeling that is inconsistent with its higher level type. The embedding based approach can thus be used both by itself and
as a pruning stage for other search techniques.

Our dataset includes 20 different gun types captured in a number of different conditions. This data acts as our original
exemplar set. The dataset also includes 12 gun types each with multiple shots recorded in the same conditions as the
exemplar set. This second set provides our training and testing sets. We show that we can reduce our exemplar space
from 20 to only 4 uniquely different gunshots without significantly limiting the ability of our embedding approach to
discriminate different gunshots in the training and testing sets. The basic hypothesis in the embedding approach is that
the relationship between the set of exemplars and space of gunshots including the testing/training set would be robust to
a change in recording conditions or the environment. That is to say the embedding distance between a particular gunshot
and the exemplars would tend to remain the same in changing environments. The implication of this are two-fold; first,
unlike other dimensionality reduction approaches we have access to particular instances/examples of entities (the
exemplars), which act as bridges to connect different recording conditions. Second, the embedding distances are
invariant across recording conditions, the embedded vector can be used as a feature of similarity between gunshots
recorded in different conditions.

Unlike other dimensionality reduction approaches , our approach generates descriptions that are always in terms of the
same exemplars. In other approaches such as PCA, the data driven nature makes it difficult if not impossible to make
correspondence in the dimensions in one space to another.

We have shown that gunshot classification across different recording conditions can be performed at a reasonable degree
of certainty (60-72\%) at a finer level (gunshot to weapon model) and at a high degree of certainty (95-100\%) at a
higher degree of abstraction (gunshot to `handgun' or `rifle'). We also investigate the use of simulated recording
conditions and artificial noise to quantitatively evaluate the performance of our approach.




                    Sensors, and Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (C3I) Technologies for
                   Homeland Security and Homeland Defense IX, edited by Edward M. Carapezza, Proc. of SPIE
                    Vol. 7666, 76662B · © 2010 SPIE · CCC code: 0277-786X/10/$18 · doi: 10.1117/12.850185

                                              Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7666 76662B-1
1 Introduction: Background and Motivation
Past work in audio classification has been carried out to classify broad categories such as speech, music,
cheering etc. [2, 3] mostly using Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM’s) and Hidden Markov Models (HMM’s).
Such broad categorization has sufficed for audio-visual event detection for applications such as consumer
video browsing and surveillance. However, it falls short when a finer characterization of the event is required.
Gunshot analysis (see [1] for a survey of the state of the art) requires fine classification of gunshots into
precise weapon categories. Clavel et al [5] come closest to such fine classification since they detect and
classify gunshots using a collection of sub-classifiers for guns, grenades etc. Other prior work in gunshot
analysis by Freytag et al [4] and others [6-11] has been based on a non-hierarchical template matching over
various weapons. The main disadvantage of the non-hierarchical approach is that it is time consuming
because it is not possible to get any characterization of a given acoustic signature without going through the
entire database of weapons. Secondly these approaches require the acoustic capture conditions to be
consistent across training and testing gunshot samples. This constraint limits the applicability of weapon
identification to controlled laboratory conditions or preselected environmental conditions. Circumventing this
problem requires a canonical space of weapon signatures that can act as the bridge between different
recording conditions and that is favorable to a hierarchical course to fine analysis of weapon acoustic
signatures.

In this paper we present an exemplar embedding approach that shows that a relatively small number of
exemplars, obtained using a wrapper function, can span an expansive space of gunshot audio signatures. By
projecting/embedding a given gunshot into the exemplar space a distance measure/feature vector is obtained
that describes the given gunshot in terms of the exemplars. The basic hypothesis in the exemplar embedding
approach is that the relationship between the set of exemplars and space of gunshots including the
testing/training set would be robust to a change in recording conditions or the environment. That is to say the
embedding distance between a particular gunshot and the exemplars would tend to remain the same in
changing environments The implication of this are two-fold; first, unlike other dimensionality reduction
approaches we have access to particular instances/examples of entities (the exemplars), which act as bridges
to connect different recording conditions. Second, the embedding distances are invariant across recording
conditions; the embedded vector can be used as a feature of similarity between gunshots recorded in different
conditions.
We also investigate the use of a hierarchy of gunshot classifications that assists in improving finer level
classification by pruning out gunshot labeling that is inconsistent with its higher level type. . The first level of
hierarchy consists of classification into broad weapons categories such as Rifle, Hand-Gun etc. The second
level of the hierarchy consists of classification into specific weapons such as 9mm, 357 etc. The embedding
based approach can thus be used both by itself and as a pruning stage for other search techniques.
Though exemplar embedding is not a new concept, a similar concept was applied for visual objet
classification [15], this is the first application of this idea to the acoustic classification domain to our
knowledge. Unlike other dimensionality reduction approaches, our approach generates descriptions that are
always in terms of the same exemplars. In other approaches such as PCA, the data driven nature makes it
difficult if not impossible to make correspondence in the dimensions in one space to another.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the difficulty caused by variation in capture
conditions. Section 3 describes our exemplar embedding approach and the hierarchical classification of
weapon acoustic signatures. We present our experimental results in section 4 and discuss concluding remarks
with future directions in section 5.

2 Difficulty Caused by Variation in Capture Conditions




                                           Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7666 76662B-2
There are several factors stemming from the mechanics of the gun as well as the capture conditions. The
muzzle blast is the primary sound for sub-sonic bullets, and is influenced by the ammunition, gun barrel
length (among other factors), as well as the presence of acoustic suppressors that disguise the weapon. The
mechanical action is picked up only if the microphone is close to the weapon. For supersonic bullets, the
shock wave precedes the muzzle blast and is comparably strong in signal power. For supersonic bullets
therefore, even a single bullet will produce pairs of sounds. Propagation through the ground or other solid
surfaces is mostly relevant when the recording device is close to the weapon. The speed of sound can be 5
times higher in solid media than in the air.
Lossy propagation and reflection – Variations in temperature, humidity, ground surfaces and obstacles
directly influence the extent of attenuation and scattering. The wind direction can affect the perceived
frequency of the gunshot. These effects are not significant at a distance of 25 meters but become noticeable at
a distance of 100 meters or greater. Finally, the angle between the gun and the microphone also plays a role
especially since the microphone has a directional characteristic. We propose a data-driven approach based on
robust signal processing for feature extraction and machine learning, since we cannot physically model all
possible variations of the factors mentioned above. Our approach relies on training classifiers derived by
using machine learning to classify weapon shots with robust features extracted from the training data and the
actual test data. The advantage of this approach is that we can capture a wide range of operating conditions by
capturing appropriate data in realistic conditions. Complex non-linear models underlying the data can be
implicitly represented in terms of the classifiers. Furthermore, this approach enables incrementally adding
new weapon types as more data becomes available, as well as adding more diversity of weapon sounds for
those already in the database. Another important aspect of our data driven and classification approach is that
we can enable similarity matching to a large database of already captured sounds for retrieving similar/same
weapons from a large collection.
Effects of variability in recording devices - Freytag et al show that [4] the same weapon with the same
ammunition yields significantly different signatures for each recording device. As Maher [1] points out,
gunshots are impulse like signals and therefore the signatures are as informative of the overall capture
conditions as they are of the nature of the gunshot. In other words, once again, we can account for small
changes in the recording device but will have to depend on a family of models trained on a suitable variety of
recording devices, with a model for each recording device. If we choose a wide enough variety of recording
devices, we expect to find at least one recording device that is acceptably close to the capture device used by
the query signature, and thus find a matching weapon.


3 Exemplar based Embedding
The central hypothesis in our approach is that the space of gunshot acoustic signatures can be modeled as a
subspace spanned by a minimal set of gunshot types or “exemplars”. Given these exemplars a test acoustic
signature can be projected or “embedded” into the exemplar subspace creating a unique descriptor that can be
used for gunshot detection, gun type classification tasks amongst others. In the following we describe our
process of feature extraction from gunshot acoustic signatures, the exemplar embedding, exemplar selection
approach and finally the classification approach using exemplar embedding.

3.1 Feature Selection & Exemplar Descriptors
Feature extraction is performed using a 30ms sliding window (10ms overlap) over the gunshot time duration
and computing 13 Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs). We empirically determined the expected
time duration of gunshots to be 0.5s based on SNR. Each frame is then multiplied by a hamming window
function:
wi = (0.5 − 0.46(cos(2π       )), 1 ≤ i ≤ N ,
                          N




                                          Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7666 76662B-3
where N is the number of samples in the window. After performing FFT on each windowed frame, MFCC
(Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients) are calculated using the following Discrete Cosine Transform:
         2 K
Cn =       ∑ log Si × cos(n(i − 1 2) π K ), n = 1,2...L
         K i =1
where K is the number of sub bands and L is the desired length of cepstrum. S i , 1 ≤ i ≤ K , represent the filter
bank energy after the passing through the triangular band pass filters. The band edges for these band pass
filters correspond to the Mel frequency scale (linear scale below 1 kHz and logarithmic scale above 1 kHz).
We select the first thirteen coefficients resulting in a 13 dimensional feature vector associated with a given
gunshot acoustic signature.
By “Exemplars” we mean a set of representative gunshot types that have the potential to span the entire space
of gunshot types in our domain. In other words we hypothesize that each gunshot type can be represented in
terms of varying degrees of affinity to the gun types in the exemplar set. For each of our gunshot exemplars
Ei we train a Gaussian Mixture Model Gi on a set of MFCC feature vectors obtained from a number of
gunshot examples of the respective gun type (For details on GMM’s and MFCC extraction, please see [2].). These
act as the descriptors for each exemplar and provide a means to obtain the degree of affinity to another
gunshot type.

3.2 Exemplar Embedding
As described earlier for each potential exemplar we use a set of training examples to generate a GMM from
the MFCC extracted from their acoustic signatures. These GMMs serve as descriptors for each of the
exemplars. Suppose there are N elements in our exemplar set. For each exemplar Ei a GMM descriptor Gi is
learned from training examples. Thus we have a set of exemplar descriptors: [G1, G2, …, GN]. Given a
sufficiently expansive set of exemplars we can hypothesize that the exemplar descriptor set spans the space of
gunshot acoustic signatures in our domain of interest. Now the act of exemplar embedding is to project a test
acoustic signature into the space of exemplar descriptors. This is performed by obtaining the MFCC feature xi
of the test gunshot and obtaining the likelihood li = G(xi) that it belongs to the exemplar descriptor Ei. The
result as shown in figure 1 is a feature vector L = [l1, l2, …, lN] that we call the embedding vector.
 Exemplar Embedding Space
         G(x2)




                    l2
                              G(x1)
                         l1

          ln

G(xn)
Figure 1: Exemplar embedding. A gunshot MFCC feature xi is projected into the exemplar space by obtaining the
likelihoods li = G(xi) for each of the exemplar descriptors.

3.3 Exemplar Selection
Identifying discriminative exemplars is an essential step of the learning process. Previous works use motion
energy minima and maxima [11, 12], or k-means clustering (adapted to return exemplars) [13] to this end.
However, there is no apparent relationship between such criteria and the discriminant quality of the selected
exemplars. In light of this, we use a wrapper [14], a technique for discriminant feature subset selection.
The idea behind a wrapper is to use the trained classifier itself to evaluate how discriminative a candidate set
of exemplars is. Thus a wrapper performs a greedy search over the full set of exemplars where in each




                                           Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7666 76662B-4
iteration, classifiers are learned and evaluated for each possible subset considered. The wrapper method we
use is called backward elimination [ref], and proceeds as follows.
Let E denote the initial set of exemplars. Given training gunshots:

1. Set X = Ø

2. Find e ∈ E, where k-means clustering of the training gunshots using Y- y as embedding exemplars has best
clustering performance.

3. Set Y = Y- y and add X = X U y

4. Go to step 2 and repeat till Y = Ø.

The crucial step in the above algorithm is step 2 where we evaluate the ability of a reduced exemplar set to
distinguish between a set of training gunshot examples. Our criteria for evaluating exemplar set’s
discriminatory power are quite straight forward. For each of the training gunshot examples we obtain the
embedding vector L using the exemplar set. These embedding vectors are then clustered using k-means
clustering. The clusters are evaluated for their accuracy by comparison with ground truth labels. In step 2 of
the above algorithm we sequentially remove one of the exemplars in the exemplar set and compute the
clustering accuracy of the reduced exemplar set. The exemplar that has the least effect on the clustering
performance is permanently removed from the exemplar set. In this fashion at every iteration of the algorithm
we prune the exemplar set and the best clustering performance is recorded. Figure 2 shows the plot of
clustering accuracy over the training set for increasing iterations of the wrapper method. At each iteration, the
exemplar with the least impact on clustering accuracy is removed. Our initial exemplar set consisted of 20
different gunshot descriptors all of which were generated from multiple gunshot acoustic signatures recorded
in the same environmental conditions. The training set consisted of approximately 100 gunshot signatures
randomly selected from different gun types in the exemplar set and separated prior to this experiment. As can
be observed in figure 2(a), as we progress through the pruning of the exemplar set the clustering accuracy
varies. An interesting thing to notice is that initially the clustering accuracy remains constant but after 5 of the
exemplars are removed from the set, the clustering accuracy improves indicating that our original exemplar
set not only had redundancy but also the fact that this redundancy can increase the complexity of the system
to a level where inference tasks like k-means or other classification approaches may be confused. From
iteration 6 to 16 we have another plateau in clustering performance. At this point any further reduction in the
exemplar set results in a monotonically decreasing training set clustering accuracy. This suggests that four
remaining exemplars (marked in red text in figure 2b) is the minimal set of exemplars that we must maintain
to achieve a satisfactory level of discriminatory power from the embedding vectors. Therefore as a result of
the pruning in the wrapper algorithm we have obtained a reduced set of exemplars that we shall use for
embedding based classification.




                                           Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7666 76662B-5
                                                                      1.    '45Colt_Officer _Model1’
                                                                      2.    '20_Gauge_Shotgun_Model1’
                                                                      3.    '22mm_Automatic_Model1’
                                                                      4.    ‘20_Gauge_Shotgun_Model2’
                                                                      5.    '9mm_Model1’
                                                                      6.    '9mm_Model2’
                                                                      7.    '357_Model1’
                                                                      8.    '50_Calib_Model1’
                                                                      9.    '22250_Model1’
                                                                      10.   '22mm_Automatic_Model2’
                                                                      11.   '762x54_Model1’
                                                                      12.   '9mm_Model3’
                                                                      13.   '357_Model2’
                                                                      14.   ‘M1Grand_Model1’
                                                                      15.   '762x54r_Model2’
                                                                      16.   ‘M1Grand_Model2
                                                                      17.   ‘M1Grand_Model3
                                                                      18.   '22250_Model2’
                                                                      19.   '45Colt_Officers_Model2’
                                                                      20.   '357_Model3’

                                       (a)                                             (b)
Figure 2: In (a) we show the clustering accuracy of the training set using sequentially reduced number of exemplars to
 generate the embedding vectors. (b) shows the set of gunshot types used as the exemplars. The exemplars are numbered
according to the sequence in which they are eliminated from the exemplar set using the wrapper method. Exemplars in
red are the ones we selected as our minimal set.


3.4 Application of Embedding to Capture Condition Invariant Weapon Identification
Using the exemplar set each new gunshot can be described as an embedding vector in the exemplar space i.e.
in terms of likeliness or affinity to each of the exemplars. As we shall see we can use this exemplar
embedding vector as the underlying bridge to communicate between different capture conditions. Assuming
that differing environmental conditions preserves the inherent relations between the different gunshot acoustic
signatures we use the same exemplar set across varying acoustic capture conditions. For each capture
condition a new set of descriptors are trained for the exemplars using gunshot examples obtained in the
particular capture conditions. The result is a set of gunshot descriptors for each different capture condition
using the same set of exemplars. This means the embedding vectors obtained from different capture
conditions can communicate and interact in a single embedding space. Figure 3 illustrates this.
                         Exemplars – Condition 1                   Exemplars – Condition 2
                         E1

                                                   l1        l1
 Test – condition1                                                                                      Test – condition2
                                                   l2        l2
                         E2
                                                   .         .
                                   ..              .         .                 ..
                                    .              .         .                  .
                                                   ln        ln

                         En
Figure 3: Exemplar embedding across different capture conditions. For each different capture condition the same gun
types are used as exemplars and test gunshots are embedded using the same gun type exemplars. This allows comparison
across capture conditions as the embedding vectors are in terms of the same exemplars.

For each gunshot sample in our training set we obtain the embedding vector using exemplars in the matching
conditions. These embedding vectors are then clustered using k-means clustering and the cluster centroids of
each gun type are used as descriptors for each gun class. In the classification stage, given a test gun shot
sample we first project it into the exemplar embedding space using the exemplar set that best matches the




                                            Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7666 76662B-6
capture conditions of the test gun shot. Note we assume we already have prior knowledge of the test gun
shot’s capture conditions. The task of automatically determining the capture conditions from an acoustic
signature is a challenging problem in itself and we do not in this paper propose a solution for this problem.
Given the embedding vector for the test, gunshot classification is performed by computing its distance from
each of the gunshot type cluster centroids and choosing the nearest class.

4 Experimental Results
To generate our exemplar set we used a pool of 20 different gunshots types all recorded in the same capture
conditions (outdoors approx 10 m from source) which consisted of a variety of rifles and handguns like 45
Colt, 9mm, 50 Caliber, 20 Gauge Shotgun etc (see figure 2 for details). For training and testing we had a
separate pool of gunshots consisting of between 5 to 15 samples of each gun type. The training set was used
in our exemplar selection algorithm (section 3.3) to obtain a reduced set of 3 exemplars: M1Grand (rifle),
22250 (rifle), 45Colt (handgun) and 357 (handgun). The training set was also used to obtain the cluster
centers for each gun type in the exemplar embedding space.
To test performance across recording conditions we simulated different capture conditions including: “Room
Reverb”, “Concert Reverb” & “Doppler Effect”. Each of the exemplar and test gunshot sample was modified
with the appropriate modulation. Exemplar embedding was performed in the respective capture conditions
and embedding vectors were compared across conditions. A true classification was marked as one when a test
gunshot sample from a different capture condition was classified or matched to the correct gun type class
cluster in the original capture conditions. Table 1 shows the performance of our approach. Note that “In First
2”, “In First 3” means the correct classification is amongst the two and three closest clusters respectively,
whereas “First” means the correct classification is also the closest cluster.

                   Room Reverb          Concert Reverb          Doppler

In First 3         0.99                 0.93                    0.71

In First 2         0.83                 0.75                    0.51

First              0.69                 0.6                     0.41

Handgun/Rifle      1                    0.97                    0.96

Table 1: Classification accuracy for embedding based approach for different capture conditions.

We also tested our approach on a reduced number of classes. Instead of all 20 gunshot types we divided the
testing set into two classes: Rifle and Handgun. As can be seen in table 1, classification accuracy is much
improved with this reduced number of classes. This suggests a hierarchy of gunshot classifications that can
assist in improving finer level classification by pruning out gunshot labeling that is inconsistent with its
higher level type. The embedding based approach can thus be used both by itself and as a pruning stage for
other search techniques.

Conclusions and Future Directions
In this paper we have presented a first study of using an exemplar embedding approach to automatically
detect and classify firearm type across different recording conditions. We demonstrate that a small number of
exemplars can span the space of gunshot audio signatures and that minimal set can be obtained using a
wrapper function. By projecting a given gunshot to the subspace spanned by the exemplar set a distance
measure/feature vector is obtained that enables comparisons across recording conditions. The embedding
based approach can be used both by itself and as a pruning stage for other search techniques.




                                         Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7666 76662B-7
In the future we plan to extend our approach to large databases of gunshot acoustic signatures as well as
increasing the number of capture conditions. Another interesting direction for further study would be
investigate the performance of our exemplar embedding approach to different categories of sounds like
musical instruments, animal sounds and even speech recognition.

References
[1]
     Maher, R.C, “Acoustical characterization of gunshots,” IEEE SAFE 2007
[2]
     Otsuka, I, Shipman, S and Divakaran, A, “A Video-Browsing Enabled Personal Video
     Recorder,” in Multimedia Content Analysis: Theory and Applications, Editor Ajay Divakaran,
     Springer 2008.
[3]
     Smaragdis, P, Radhakrishnan, R, Wilson, K, “Context Extraction through Audio Signal
     Analysis,” in Multimedia Content Analysis: Theory and Applications, Editor Ajay Divakaran,
     Springer 2008.
[4]
     Freytag, J.C., and Brustad, B.M., “A survey of audio forensic gunshot investigations,” Proc.
     AES 12th International Conf., Audio Forensics in the Digital Age, pp. 131-134, July 2005.
[5]
     Clavel, C. Ehrette, T. Richard, G., “Events Detection for an Audio-Based Surveillance
     System,” IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo, ICME 2005.
[6]
     Koenig, B.E., Hoffman, S.M., Nakasone, H., and Beck, S.D., “Signal convolution of recorded
     free-field gunshot sounds,” J. Audio Eng. Soc., vol. 46(7/8), pp. 634-653, July/Aug 1998.
[7]
     Sadler, B.M., Pham, T., and Sadler, L.C., “Optimal and wavelet-based shock wave detection and
     estimation,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol 104(2), pt. 1, pp. 955-963. August 1998.
[8]
     Duckworth, G.L., Gilbert, D.C., and Barger, J.E., “Acoustic counter-sniper system,” Proc. of
     SPIE, vol. 2938, Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence Systems for Law
     Enforcement, E.M. Carapezza and D. Spector, Eds., pp. 262-275, February 1997.
[9]
     Weissler, P.G., and Kobal, M.T., “Noise of police firearms,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 56(5), pp.
     1515-1522, November 1974.
[10]
     Maher, R.C. "Modeling and signal processing of acoustic gunshot recordings," Proc. IEEE
     Signal Processing Society 12th DSP Workshop, Jackson Lake, WY, September 2006.
[11]
     Harris, C. "Absorption of sound in the air versus humidity and temperature," J. Acoust. Soc.
     Am., vol. 40(1), pp. 148-159, January 1966.
[12]
     F. Lv and R. Nevatia. Single view human action recognition using key pose matching and viterbi
     path searching.CVPR, 2007.
[13]
     A. Ogale, A. Karapurkar, G. Guerra-Filho, and Y. Aloimonos. View-invariant identification of
     pose sequences for action recognition. In VACE, 2004. 4
[14]
     G. H. John, R. Kohavi, and K. Pfleger. Irrelevant features and the subset selection problem. In
     ICML, 1994
[15]
     Yanlin Guo, Ying Shan, Harpreet S. Sawhney, Rakesh Kumar, “PEET: Prototype Embedding
     and Embedding Transition for Matching Vehicles over Disparate Viewpoints,” IEEE CVPR
     2007.




                                       Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7666 76662B-8
