             sensors
Article
Evaluating the Performance of Pre-Trained Convolutional
Neural Network for Audio Classification on Embedded Systems
for Anomaly Detection in Smart Cities
Mimoun Lamrini 1,2, * , Mohamed Yassin Chkouri 2                          and Abdellah Touhafi 1,3

                                         1   Department of Engineering Sciences and Technology (INDI), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB),
                                             1050 Brussels, Belgium; abdellah.touhafi@vub.be
                                         2   SIGL Laboratory, National School of Applied Sciences of Tetuan, Abdelmalek Essaadi University,
                                             Tetuan 93000, Morocco; mychkouri@uae.ac.ma
                                         3   Department of Electronics and Informatics (ETRO), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), 1050 Brussels, Belgium
                                         *   Correspondence: mimoun.lamrini@vub.be


                                         Abstract: Environmental Sound Recognition (ESR) plays a crucial role in smart cities by accurately
                                         categorizing audio using well-trained Machine Learning (ML) classifiers. This application is partic-
                                         ularly valuable for cities that analyzed environmental sounds to gain insight and data. However,
                                         deploying deep learning (DL) models on resource-constrained embedded devices, such as Raspberry
                                         Pi (RPi) or Tensor Processing Units (TPUs), poses challenges. In this work, an evaluation of an existing
                                         pre-trained model for deployment on Raspberry Pi (RPi) and TPU platforms other than a laptop is
                                         proposed. We explored the impact of the retraining parameters and compared the sound classification
                                         performance across three datasets: ESC-10, BDLib, and Urban Sound. Our results demonstrate the
                                         effectiveness of the pre-trained model for transfer learning in embedded systems. On laptops, the
                                         accuracy rates reached 96.6% for ESC-10, 100% for BDLib, and 99% for Urban Sound. On RPi, the
                                         accuracy rates were 96.4% for ESC-10, 100% for BDLib, and 95.3% for Urban Sound, while on RPi
                                         with Coral TPU, the rates were 95.7% for ESC-10, 100% for BDLib and 95.4% for the Urban Sound.
Citation: Lamrini, M.; Chkouri, M.Y.;    Utilizing pre-trained models reduces the computational requirements, enabling faster inference.
Touhafi, A. Evaluating the               Leveraging pre-trained models in embedded systems accelerates the development, deployment, and
Performance of Pre-Trained
                                         performance of various real-time applications.
Convolutional Neural Network for
Audio Classification on Embedded
                                         Keywords: deep learning; pre-trained models; environment sound recognition; embedded system
Systems for Anomaly Detection in
Smart Cities. Sensors 2023, 23, 6227.
https://doi.org/10.3390/s23136227

Academic Editors: Pavlos Lazaridis,      1. Introduction
Euler Cássio Tavares De Macêdo and
                                              ESR is a critical component for various applications, such as noise pollution monitor-
Christos Tachtatzis
                                         ing, public safety [1], industrial safety, and smart cities [2]. Environmental noise monitoring
Received: 30 May 2023                    is conducted to detect and track the sources of disturbance in residential and natural envi-
Revised: 26 June 2023                    ronments, including the sound produced by aircraft during takeoff and landing at nearby
Accepted: 5 July 2023                    airports [3]. Intelligent sound monitoring devices are commonly deployed using embedded
Published: 7 July 2023                   platforms, such as microcontrollers or digital signal processors. Various methods, including
                                         Machine Learning algorithms and signal processing techniques, have been investigated to
                                         achieve the accurate classification of urban sounds with a limited number of embedded
                                         devices. Several studies have employed the classical ML algorithms, such as k-Nearest
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
                                         Neighbor (k-NN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), Naive Bayes, and Decision Trees, which
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                         have been previously evaluated [4]. Sound recognition has seen significant progress in ML,
This article is an open access article
                                         as evidenced by the recent advancements. Specifically, ANN and CNN have been shown
distributed under the terms and
                                         to offer precise sound recognition with high accuracy levels [5]. Nonetheless, when these
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
                                         methods are applied to embedded devices, there is a reduction in the accuracy and longer
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
                                         inference times. This is due to the need for computationally intensive operations, which
4.0/).                                   are often limited by the available resources of embedded systems. Capturing audio using a




Sensors 2023, 23, 6227. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23136227                                                    https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                            2 of 27




                         microphone on-site and analyzing it in the cloud may not always be feasible or preferable.
                         This method not only raises privacy concerns due to potential interception by a third party
                         but also results in significant latency.
                              There are existing specialized platforms available for this purpose [6]. For instance,
                         Google has developed an extension to its well-known machine learning framework Tensor-
                         Flow (TF), which allows for rapid and efficient inference of DL on advanced embedded
                         platforms such as RPi. In addition, Google has developed a specialized hardware accelera-
                         tor exclusively designed for deep neural networks, known as the TPU, which serves as an
                         embedded solution with low latency and low power consumption.
                              The work presented in this paper assesses the current methods for implementing
                         a pre-trained model on embedded systems. The pre-trained model for ESR has been
                         embedded as an example. Due to the demands of low latency, power efficiency, and
                         real-time response required by the application, the evaluation focuses on low-end TPUs
                         as embedded devices, whereas high-performance general-purpose embedded devices
                         such as the RPi are employed as a benchmark or comparison point. The evaluation of
                         hardware accelerators, specifically TPUs, was conducted from both accuracy and latency
                         perspectives. Additionally, various tool flows are examined, evaluated, and discussed
                         in terms of embedding pre-trained models, including Edge TPU [7] and TensorFlow Lite
                         (TFLite) [8]. This comprehensive analysis offers valuable insights into the necessary steps
                         and effort required for embedding pre-trained models on TPUs as well as the different
                         strategies employed to use these technologies.
                              The principal achievements of this study can be summarized as follows:
                         •    A technique to evaluate audio features based on windowing, aimed to increase the
                              size and diversity of a training datasets;
                         •    Combination of CNN and ANN based on DL with a pre-trained model and evaluation
                              of their deployment on embedded devices for ESR;
                         •    An in-depth examination, assessment, and discussion of existing tool flows for de-
                              ploying a pre-trained model on TPUs;
                         •    A comparison of the performance attainable on TPUs for ESR using a combination of
                              a pre-trained model with CNN and ANN models.
                              Our proposed system represents a significant advancement in utilizing a pre-trained
                         model to replicate the performance achieved on laptops. In addition to introducing our
                         innovative methodology, we present two DL models specifically designed to address the
                         constraints imposed by embedded devices. To thoroughly assess and compare the effec-
                         tiveness of both approaches, we conduct experiments across different platforms, including
                         a standard PC and a widely used embedded device. To ensure a fair and comprehensive
                         evaluation, we leverage multiple audio datasets commonly used in related studies. Our
                         evaluation process focuses on key metrics such as accuracy and execution time, which
                         provide valuable insights into the performance of our models.
                              Time-series classification refers to the task of categorizing or labeling time-series data
                         into different classes or categories based on their temporal patterns. In this problem, the
                         input data consists of sequences of observations or measurements taken at regular intervals
                         over time. Two important aspects of the time-series classification problem are feature
                         extraction and evaluation metrics. Feature extraction plays a critical role in time-series
                         classification. The objective is to identify meaningful features or representations that
                         capture the distinctive patterns in the data. Techniques such as Fourier transforms, wavelet
                         transforms, or feature engineering can be employed to achieve this goal. When assessing
                         the performance of a time-series classification model, standard classification metrics such as
                         accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score are commonly used. However, additional metrics
                         specific to time-series tasks can also be relevant. For instance, the dynamic time warping
                         distance measures the similarity between two time-series by accounting for temporal
                         distortions. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC) is
                         another metric that assesses the model’s ability to discriminate between different classes
                         based on the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. By focusing on effective feature
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                            3 of 27




                         extraction and selecting appropriate evaluation metrics, researchers and practitioners can
                         enhance the accuracy and interpretability of time-series classification models. Some real-
                         world examples of time-series classification problems include detecting anomalies in sensor
                         data, classifying human activities based on accelerometer readings, predicting disease
                         outbreaks based on historical data, or identifying fraudulent financial transactions based
                         on transaction patterns. Addressing these challenges requires specialized techniques and
                         models tailored for time-series classification, such as CNN-1D.
                              The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 covers the related
                         work that falls within the scope of our problem. Section 3 provides the context and
                         methodology for the evaluation. In Section 4, we provide a description of the data pre-
                         processing and experimental setup. In Section 5, we present all the essential background
                         information required for comprehending the employed models, assessing the solutions
                         that were generated, understanding tool workflows, and examining the descriptions of
                         the embedded systems being tested. In Section 6, we evaluate the pre-trained model on a
                         laptop and embedded systems. Section 7 encompasses the examination of experimental
                         outcomes and the insights gained from the process. Finally, we conclude this paper in
                         Section 8.

                         2. Related Work
                               In recent years, ESR has garnered significant attention, with a focus on leveraging DL
                         methods to enhance the performance of ML models. Previous studies have explored various
                         techniques for sound identification using DL models. Some models employ spectrograms
                         or MFCCs as inputs for ANN (Artificial Neural Network) or CNN (Convolutional Neural
                         Network) classifiers, while others directly use the raw waveform [9,10].
                               The authors of [11] proposed the use of a CNN for sound classification in a Wireless
                         Sensor Network (WSN) consisting of RPi nodes. The RPi devices were utilized to encode
                         audio and transmit it to a computer for classification. The authors demonstrated that sound
                         classification and feature extraction could be performed on the embedded device, which
                         possessed sufficient computational power for these tasks. Experiments were conducted by
                         running all the necessary sound recognition operations on an RPi.
                               In [6], several traditional ML algorithms were implemented and evaluated on an
                         RPi in terms of accuracy and classification time. The study introduced a hierarchical
                         approach to audio classification, involving multiple stages and providing a flexible solution.
                         This approach allowed for the selection of suitable classifiers for each stage, considering
                         factors such as audio type, execution time, and power usage. In our research, we have
                         almost a similar representation of the process, but we have made several changes and
                         additions to incorporate operations and methods that result in improved accuracy and
                         faster classification time compared to the previous methods.
                               The research presented in [5] was one of the early investigations into the application of
                         CNNs for ESR and has become a highly influential reference for evaluating the performance
                         of more recent networks, particularly when using the ESC dataset [12]. However, there
                         is a lack of discussion regarding the advantages and practicality of integrating machine
                         learning techniques for sound classification.
                               Within the IoT context, ref. [7] proposed a solution for the instant classification of
                         urban sounds using a CNN model specifically designed for deployment on an RPi 4. The
                         model utilized 2D convolutions and spectrogram feature maps as inputs for classification.
                         However, no evaluation of the model’s inference time was provided. Similarly, ref. [8] intro-
                         duced and evaluated an embedded solution that employed CNNs and spectrogram inputs
                         for sound classification on a low-power microcontroller. Various CNN architectures were
                         evaluated to identify the best trade-off between accuracy, CPU, and memory usage on the
                         microcontroller. Furthermore, the timing summary, which demonstrates that lightweight
                         Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) can achieve state-of-the-art accuracy even on
                         resource-constrained embedded devices, is not provided. Meanwhile, the timing summary
                         is integrated in our result.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                           4 of 27




                               In their research [13], the authors proposed a temporal–frequency attention-based
                         CNN model (TFCNN) to effectively learn time and frequency features from Log-Mel
                         spectrograms. To validate the effectiveness of their proposed method, they designed
                         an experiment to examine the influence of a specific frequency band in the spectrogram
                         on the model’s classification. Furthermore, the study introduced two novel attention
                         mechanisms: the temporal attention mechanism and the frequency attention mechanism.
                         These mechanisms enable the model to focus on important frequency bands and meaningful
                         time frames within the spectrogram, effectively reducing the impact of background noise
                         and irrelevant frequency bands.
                               Hardware accelerators, such as TPUs (Tensor Processing Units) and FPGAs (Field
                         Programmable Gate Arrays), were investigated in [14] to improve the DL inference perfor-
                         mance for audio applications. However, due to factors such as cost or real-time processing
                         requirements, these specialized solutions may not be universally accessible or suitable for
                         all platforms. As an alternative, CPUs were considered for inference, which can be used in
                         both embedded devices and desktop audio plugins. The authors conducted an evaluation
                         of the classification time and accuracy of these models, but unfortunately, they did not
                         achieve satisfactory results on different devices. In contrast, our proposed innovation
                         revolves around utilizing pre-trained models, which have proven to yield favorable results
                         and can be implemented quickly.
                               The study [15] investigates an improved approach to multiclass damage localization,
                         considering various damage severities and scenarios. The limited dataset challenge is
                         addressed by augmenting the data through windowing the acceleration measurements.
                         Additionally, a novel majority voting technique is employed using a global CNN-1D model
                         to enhance the classification results. The effectiveness of the proposed CNN-1D model
                         is assessed by systematically tuning hyperparameters, including window size, random
                         weight initialization, and optimal learning rates. This evaluation showcases the robustness
                         of the selected optimal architecture for the CNN-1D network. In our research, we faced the
                         similar challenge of the limited dataset, and we found that augmenting the data through
                         windowing the acceleration measurements was a good solution.
                               In summary, while various sound classifiers have been examined in previous research,
                         only a limited number have been tested on embedded systems. Our evaluation goes beyond
                         prior work by not only covering a broader range of sound classifiers but also evaluating
                         their performance on a modern embedded system.

                         3. Methodology
                              This section provides an overview of sound classification and connects it with the
                         methodology employed in this study. It then introduces the selected datasets, the pre-
                         trained model chosen, and the metrics used for evaluation.
                              These experiments seek to evaluate how the performance of the pre-trained model
                         compares across different platforms and to investigate its potential to exceed the outcomes
                         achieved by traditional ML techniques. Similar to the many other tasks that involve classify-
                         ing patterns, sound classification consists of three crucial components:
                         •    Sensing: Quantifying a signal or audible event;
                         •    Pre-processing of audio: Extracting distinct features from the captured sound signal;
                         •    Lastly, classification: Identifying the sound event’s characteristics.
                               The audio signal processing component primarily involves extracting features from
                         a recorded audio signal. To accomplish this, diverse methods of time-frequency analysis,
                         originally designed for speech processing, are employed. The goal of feature extraction is
                         to quantize the audio signal and transform it into distinct characteristic features, resulting
                         in an N-dimensional feature vector that often represents each audio frame. A classifier
                         then uses this feature vector to determine the context of the audio event and classify
                         it accordingly.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                           5 of 27




                              The classification process involves two distinct phases:
                         •    The training phase: During this phase, a representative model is trained through the
                              use of pre-recorded audio data obtained from labeled training sets. In addition, during
                              the final phase of training, a pre-trained YAMNet model was incorporated, which
                              enabled the system to predict 521 different classes. Following this, the final dense
                              layer was frozen and replaced with a suitable layer to meet our specific requirements.
                              The resulting model could predict 10 classes instead of the original 512;
                         •    The classification phase: The system obtains audio inputs from diverse sources such
                              as pre-recorded audio data or directly from a microphone.
                             During the classification stage, the models created during the training phase were
                         employed to recognize and categorize the types of audio captured through the microphone.
                         Figure 1 illustrates this process.




                         Figure 1. Steps involved in the process of audio classification.

                              The key innovation of our method lies in the utilization of the pre-trained model in
                         embedded systems. This approach allows us to leverage the knowledge and capabilities
                         captured by the pre-trained model; the key innovation of our method lies in the utilization
                         of a pre-trained model on embedded systems. This approach enables us to leverage the
                         knowledge and capabilities captured by this model, which have been trained on large-scale
                         datasets, and apply them to resource-constrained embedded devices. By employing a
                         pre-trained model, we can benefit from their learned representations, feature extraction
                         capabilities, and generalization abilities without the need for extensive on-device training
                         or significant computational resources. This innovation enables us to achieve efficient
                         and accurate inference on embedded systems, thereby opening up new possibilities for
                         deploying advanced machine learning models in real-world applications with limited
                         computational resources.
                              Moreover, our proposed systems distinguish themselves from previous research in the
                         following ways:
                         •    Implementations of the pre-trained model on embedded systems with the Coral TPU
                              bring together several benefits, including efficient inference, real-time responsiveness,
                              on-device privacy, portability, and edge intelligence. This integration allows for
                              advanced AI applications at the edge, expanding the range of possibilities.
                         •    We conducted a comparative study across different platforms, which provides valuable
                              insights and enables us to evaluate the performance and suitability of our approach in
                              comparison to other systems.
                         •    During our study, we discovered that the Coral TPU is not supported on all operat-
                              ing systems. This finding highlights a limitation in compatibility, which should be
                              considered when implementing our proposed systems.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                        6 of 27




                         3.1. Datasets Selection
                              Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the popular datasets that we incorporated
                         into our methodology to identify appropriate sound systems for embeddeding. Although
                         many of these datasets encompass categories beyond urban sounds, they still encompass a
                         significant number of representative urban sounds that align with our objective.

                         Table 1. The original datasets that were used in this study.

                                  BDLib Dataset                     ESC-10 Dataset                  Urban Sound Dataset
                             Categories    Total Time (s)     Categories      Total Time (s)     Categories       Total Time (s)
                             Airplane           100          Dog barking             200        Air conditioner       6577
                             Alarms             100           Baby crying            200           Car horn           4819
                            Applause            100            Clock tick            200       Children playing      13,454
                              Birds             100         Person sneezing          200           Dog bark           8399
                              Dogs              100           Helicopter             200            Drilling          4864
                           Motorcycles          100            Chainsaw              200         Engine idling        3604
                               Rain             100             Rooster              200           Gun shot           7865
                            Sea waves           100          Fire cracking           200         Jackhammer           4328
                              Rivers            100            Sea waves             200             Siren            4477
                          Thunderstorm          100               Rain               200         Street music         6453


                         •     BDLib2 [16]: Consisting of audio segments lasting 10 s, the collection was sourced
                               from both the BBC Complete Sound Effects Library [17] and Freesound.org [18]. The
                               authors carefully selected 180 samples in a meticulous manner to ensure the absence
                               of background noise or overlap across the 10 classes. Each class comprises 18 samples,
                               which are presented as 16-bit .wav files with a sample rate of 44,100 Hz.
                         •     ESC [12]: In this dataset, a collection of over 2000 short audio clips are categorized into
                               50 different categories, which are known as ESC-50. This dataset encompasses a wide
                               range of sounds not limited to urban environments, including animal, natural, and
                               domestic sounds. However, for the purposes of this study, the shorter version of the
                               dataset, ESC-10, which recognizes only 10 audio categories, was used.
                         •     Urban Sound: This dataset is larger than other environmental sound classification
                               datasets; it consists of over 12 GB and contains 1302 short audio clips with 10 classes
                               with a total duration of 97,200 s of audio tagged [19]. Urban Sound was created by
                               manually filtering and labeling each recording obtained from Freesound [19], which is
                               an online sound repository.

                         3.2. Theoretical Background
                              In this section, we provide a summary of the models used in our evaluation of the
                         two platforms. The first model is a simple ANN, and the second is a CNN, which has
                         one-dimensional convolution layers. In our research, it was not the purpose to make two
                         stronger models but to test pre-trained models on PC and RPi 4 with or without the USB
                         Coral TPU.

                         3.2.1. Artificial Neural Network
                              ANN is widely recognized as one of the prevailing ML methodologies utilized in
                         modern times [20]. The objective of this algorithm was to address intricate non-linear
                         problems. ANNs were designed to emulate the neural networks observed in the human
                         brain [21]. Figure 2 on the left depicts a simple example of a Neural Network architecture.
                              The architecture of an ANN consists of an input layer, one or more hidden layers, and
                         an output layer [22].
                              As illustrated in the right panel of Figure 2, each layer consisted of one or more neurons.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                 7 of 27




                         Figure 2. The left panel displays a node example in a neural. The right panel shows an example of an
                         ANN with a single output. The middle nodes within the hidden layers and the last node within the
                         output layer represent neurons.

                              In our ANN model experiment, we employed the Adam optimizer and conducted
                         100 epochs for each analysis. The batch size was set to 32 uniformly. The Rectified Linear
                         Unit (ReLU) activation function was used for the first two layers, while the Softmax
                         activation function was applied to the last layer of each model. The characteristics of our
                         proposed ANN architecture are summarized in Table 2. The architecture consists of the
                         following layers:
                         •    Dense Layer 1: This layer consists of 256 neurons with the ReLU activation function.
                         •    Dense Layer 2: This layer consists of 128 neurons with the ReLU activation function.
                         •    Flatten Layer: This layer flattens the output from the previous layer.
                         •    Output Layer: The final output layer consists of the output units, which are equal to
                              the number of classes used in the dataset. The Softmax activation function is applied
                              in the last layer.
                              The characteristics of our proposed ANN architecture are summarized in Table 2.

                         Table 2. Architecture of our proposed ANN model and parameter information used in each layer.

                          Type of Layer                     Output Shape                       Number of Parameters
                          Input_1 (InputLayer)              [(None, 1024)]                                0
                          dense (dense)                       (None, 256)                             262,400
                          dense_1 (Dense)                     (None, 128)                              32,896
                          flatten (Flatten)                   (None, 128)                                0
                          dense_2 (Dense)                      (None, 10)                               1290
                          Total:                                                                      296,586
                          Trainable:                                                                  296,586
                          Non-trainable:                                                                 0


                         3.2.2. Convolutional Neural Networks
                               The CNN model has made significant strides in computer vision, recognition and
                         language modeling, among other fields [23]. Empirical evidence confirms the superior effi-
                         ciency of CNN-based architectures compared to conventional methods across various classi-
                         fication tasks [24]. In recent years, CNNs have yielded excellent results in automatic sound
                         event recognition. There has been a remarkable surge in the use of CNNs for classifying
                         distinct audible sounds over the past decade [25], with numerous researchers implementing
                         different techniques on CNNs to develop their sound classification models [26,27].
                               In our CNN model experiment, we incorporated several important parameters and
                         mechanisms. These include utilizing the Adam optimizer, conducting 100 epochs for each
                         analysis, maintaining a uniform batch size of 32, applying an L2 norm regularizer with a
                         value of 0.001, utilizing the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function for the initial
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                              8 of 27




                         two layers, and employing the Softmax activation function for the final layer in each model.
                         These characteristics define our proposed architecture for the CNN model.
                              Hyperparameter tuning such as Adam, batch-size 32, epochs 100 and L2 norm regu-
                         larizer with a value of 0.001 is a widely employed strategy to improve the performance of
                         ML and DL models. It involves an iterative process wherein the model is retrained at each
                         iteration to discover the optimal hyperparameter values. This technique has been widely
                         adopted by numerous compelling research studies in the field [28].
                              The characteristics of our proposed ANN architecture are summarized in Table 3. The
                         architecture is composed of the following layers:
                         •    L1: The first layer contains 256 filters with a kernel size equal to three. The regularize
                              L2 norm with a value of 0.001 is used. The activation function utilized is ReLU.
                         •    L2: The second layer contains 128 filters with a kernel size equal to three. The L2 norm
                              regularizer is also used. The padding for all the feature extraction involves in this
                              layer is “valid” and ReLU as the activation function.
                         •    L3: Flatten the output from the previous layer.
                         •    L4: The last layer is the 2nd dense layer. It consists of the output units. These are equal
                              to the number of classes used in the dataset. The Softmax activation function is used
                              in the last layer.

                         Table 3. Architecture of our CNN model and parameter details for each layer utilized in our
                         proposed method.

                          Type of Layer                      Output Shape                    Number of Parameters
                          Input_1 (InputLayer)                [(None, 1024)]                           0
                          tf.reshape (TFOpLambda)            (None, 1024, 1)                           0
                          conv1d (Conv1D)                   (None, 1022, 256)                         1024
                          conv1d_1 (Conv1D)                 (None, 1020, 128)                        98,432
                          flatten (Flatten)                  (None, 130,560)                            0
                          dense_2 (Dense)                       (None, 10)                         1,305,610
                          Total:                                                                   1,405,066
                          Trainable:                                                               1,405,066
                          Non-trainable:                                                               0


                         3.2.3. Transfer Learning
                               Transfer learning is an ML strategy that entails adapting a model trained on one task
                         to a related yet distinct task by leveraging knowledge acquired from a source domain and
                         applying it to a target domain [29]. This technique is beneficial for dealing with limited or
                         insufficient data in the target domain. Transfer learning has been successfully employed
                         in various domains [30], including classification, regression, and clustering. For instance,
                         utilizing features extracted from ImageNet images has shown efficacy in the PASCAL VOC
                         dataset [31].
                               In the context of sound classification, transfer learning can involve using image-based
                         representations of sound, such as spectrograms and scalograms, as the common input
                         to both the pre-trained model and the raw data [29]. To preprocess sound excerpts, they
                         are commonly transformed into images, typically following suitable segmentation. CNN
                         is frequently employed for this purpose by utilizing convolutional and pooling layers to
                         extract the features. The classification layers connected to the initial segment are responsible
                         for classifying the input. The most suitable approach for transfer learning depends on the
                         characteristics of the specific problem and similarity between the original and target tasks.

                         3.3. YAMNet Model
                              Yet another Audio Mobilenet Network, or in short the YAMNet model, is a pre-
                         trained deep neural network incorporating the MobileNetV1 (depthwise separable CNN)
                         architecture. This model was trained with the AudioSet ontology [32], and it can predict
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                             9 of 27




                         audio events from 521 classes from more than 2 million YouTube clips [33]. The dataset
                         comprises various classes of environmental sounds, such as laughter, barking, sirens, etc.
                               The YAMNet is an efficient model designed to fit a minimal delay in the processing
                         of AI models on low-cost devices, where the computational resources are quite restrained.
                         In the architecture of the MobileNet model [34], this model based on depthwise separable
                         convolutions is replaced by the standard convolution. The original paper was provided by
                         Google Inc. [34] to give more detail about this particular approach, where it was shown
                         that the computational cost may be minimized up to nine times compared with standard
                         convolution [5]. Furthermore, as shown in Table 4, the YAMNet model consists of 28 con-
                         volutional layers, 1 global average pooling layer, and 1 fully connected layer serving as its
                         input and output layers. Depthwise separable convolutions and standard convolutions
                         are sequentially stacked up to the pooling layer [33]. The convolutional layers in YAMNet
                         utilize ReLU activation functions and incorporate a batch normalization technique [34].
                         Finally, the output layer utilizes a Softmax activation function to provide the sound class
                         prediction [9].

                         Table 4. Details of the YAMNet model.

                               CNN               Type            Trained in    Number of Layers   Millions of Parameters
                              YAMNet            Sound             Youtube             28                   3.7


                              The model accepts a 1D arbitrary length containing a waveform, and it is necessary
                         to resample the audio clips to 16,000 HZ in the range [−1.0, +1.0] with single-channel
                         audio [35]. The complete inference process of YAMNet, starting from the sound file and
                         leading to the prediction, is illustrated in Figure 3.




                         Figure 3. The process of conducting inferences using YAMNet was derived from a modified source.

                         3.4. Mel Spectrogram Features
                               The feature maps utilized as input for YAMNet are generated by extracting coefficients
                         from time-frequency representations of sounds. Nevertheless, the frequency content of
                         sound is not perceived linearly by humans. It is widely noted that the auditory systems
                         of humans are most sensitive within the 2–5 kHz frequency range [36]. Our ability to
                         differentiate tones is more accurate in lower frequency ranges compared to higher frequency
                         ranges, where the tones may exhibit greater similarity, assuming a consistent frequency gap
                         between the two sounds [33]. Hence, it is easy for humans to distinguish between various
                         sounds without much effort, such as differentiating between speech and music, the sounds
                         of a car and truck, the quality of speech of babies and adults, various speakers, noise, and
                         other useful sounds. We want machines to be able to classify sounds in a similar way to
                         how humans do it effortlessly [37]. In particular, YAMNet uses a Mel spectrogram as its
                         feature map.
                               The Mel scale and Mel Spectrogram were designed to account for the logarithmic
                         nature of human hearing. The Mel scale is based on the psychoacoustic perception of pitch
                         and can be used to convert frequencies ( f ) using Equation (1). These tools were developed
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                             10 of 27




                         based on empirical evidence and consider the way that the human ear perceives sound,
                         which is not a linear process.
                                                         (
                                                             f                        , f ≤ 1000 Hz
                                                 Mel =                
                                                                             f
                                                                                                                      (1)
                                                             2595 log10 1 + 700       , f > 1000 Hz

                         3.5. Metrics
                             To ensure a comprehensive assessment of the various classifiers, we used a range
                         of metrics that included both accuracy and performance. This includes the F1 score, a
                         widely used accuracy metric, as well as metrics such as inference time, power consumption,
                         and energy usage, which are particularly relevant for real-time applications on embedded
                         devices. By considering both accuracy and performance, we can make more informed and
                         complete evaluations of the classifiers.

                         3.5.1. Accuracy
                               To assess the accuracy of the multi-classifiers, we used the F1 score, which combines
                         precision and recall into a single metric. These two metrics, which are based on the number
                         of true positives, false positives, and false negatives, are essential for evaluating the perfor-
                         mance of the classifiers. Using the F1 score, we obtained a more comprehensive view of the
                         classifiers’ accuracy. Precision (as defined by Equation (2)) measures the classifier’s ability
                         to correctly identify the instances of each class, while recall (as defined by Equation (3))
                         represents the classifier’s ability to find all of the correct instances for each class. These
                         metrics can be expressed as follows:
                                                                                tp
                                                               Precision =                                             (2)
                                                                             tp + f p
                                                                                tp
                                                                 Recall =            ,                                 (3)
                                                                            t p + tn
                         where t p represents the number of true positives, tn represents the number of true negatives,
                         and f p represents the number of false positives. These parameters are utilized to calculate
                         the F1 score using Equation (4)

                                                                    2 × Precision × Recall
                                                      F1 score =                           .                           (4)
                                                                      Precision + Recall

                         3.5.2. Inference Time
                              For real-time audio recognition, both accuracy and speed in classification are important
                         considerations. To evaluate the classifiers, we measured the classification time, which is
                         the amount of time required to determine the class of an audio sample. The value of this
                         classification time may differ based on the platform being used and can be a useful factor
                         in selecting the target platform for a given application. The algorithm used in our study is
                         provided in Algorithm 1.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                              11 of 27




                         Algorithm 1 Inference Time Calculation
                          1: procedure CALCULATE I NFERENCE T IME (model, Xtest )
                          2:    Variables:
                          3:       input_data, start_time, prediction_in f erence_time, mean_time : float;
                          4:       times : list;
                          5:       i : int;
                          6:
                          7:    for i ≤ length( Xtest ) do
                          8:        input_data = Xtest [i ]              . Get the input data for the current sample
                          9:        input_data = np.newaxis(input_data, axis = 0) . Reshape the input to match
                             the expected shape
                         10:        start_time = time.perf_counter()                          . Record the start time
                         11:         prediction = model.predict(input_data) . Perform the forward pass to get the
                             prediction
                         12:        in f erence_time = time.perf_counter() − start_time     . Calculate the inference
                             time
                         13:        times.append(in f erence_time × 1000) . Append the inference time to the list
                         14:    end for
                         15:     mean_time = np.mean(times)                      . Calculate the mean inference time
                         16:     std_time = np.std(times)      . Calculate the standard deviation of inference times
                         17:    return mean_time, std_time
                         18: end procedure


                         4. Evaluation and Platform
                              In this section, the pre-processing of audio and the training procedure are provided as
                         well as the evaluation of embedded platforms. The evaluation process as shown in Figure 4
                         was utilized in this evaluation. To ensure sufficient training data, a windowing technique
                         is employed during the feature extraction process.




                         Figure 4. Evaluation process outlining the steps executed to ensure an equitable comparison of the
                         DL-based approach.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                              12 of 27




                              During this procedure, the audio features were extracted for each individual audio
                         frame and processed sequentially. Features with similar attributes are combined to create a
                         unified feature vector, and statistical metrics such as the mean are employed for aggregation.
                         However, the sum, median, or GMM (Gaussian mixture model) can also be used. The
                         purpose of this aggregation is to reduce the data and characteristics of audio frame samples
                         into a single feature vector.
                              All results were then compared to a pre-trained model. The results are further detailed
                         and discussed in the sections below.

                         4.1. Dataset Pre-Processing: Windowing
                               The ESC-10 dataset has 400 audio files in the ogg format compared to 180 audio files
                         in the wav format in the BDLib dataset. Meanwhile, there are 1302 audio recordings in the
                         Urban Sound collection. The length of the audio files in the BDLib is 10 s, while the length of
                         those in ESC-10 is 8 s; however, the length of the audio files in the Urban Sound dataset varies
                         from 1 s to several minutes.
                               To streamline the experimentation process, the audio files in the Urban Sound dataset,
                         which are originally available in various formats such as wav, ogg, mp3, etc., are converted
                         into the wav format. This format is preferred due to its lossless quality and the majority of
                         audio files in the dataset already being stored in this format.
                               The windowing technique allows the production of additional data from these audio
                         files. The function of the windowing process is shown in Figure 5.




                         Figure 5. A graphical illustration depicts the utilization of the windowing method to gather seven
                         audio segments from a four-second audio file for training purposes.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                               13 of 27




                               The windowing flow is applied in the first 4 s when an audio file is loaded. The 4 s of
                         audio have been split into seven separate one-second frames of audio with an overlap of
                         50%. The frames obtained from the windowing process are temporarily stored in an array,
                         while features are extracted from them during this time.
                               The process is then repeated for each subsequent audio file in the dataset, generat-
                         ing seven times more feature groups to ensure an ample amount of training data. For
                         example, in the case of the ESC-10 dataset, the windowing technique resulted in obtaining
                         2800 feature groups compared to only 400 without it.
                               It is important to note that the primary objective of windowing is to create additional
                         training samples, and the multiple feature groups are not merged to form an averaged
                         feature group per audio file.
                               The audio files in the dataset used in this research are diverse from one another,
                         meaning that the duration of the audio files can vary. In addition, the relevant audio
                         segments did not consistently commence at the beginning of the audio files.
                               Consequently, each folder of the dataset comes with the csv file content, and the
                         metadata give all the information about the audio files, such as the start time. The starting
                         time serves as an offset to determine the starting point of the 4 s used for windowing. For
                         instance, if audio file X starts at 2 s, the windowing process is applied from seconds 2 to 6.
                               A feature group is produced for each frame, and the feature groups extracted from the
                         initial 4 s of the audio file are utilized for both training and testing of the classifiers. This is
                         because all the feature groups obtained from the first 4 s of the audio files are utilized to
                         train classifiers that form the basis of our approach.

                         4.2. Dataset Processing
                              The classification process included partitioning the data into training (80%), test-
                         ing (10%), and validation (10%) sets. Notably, feature extraction and sound classifica-
                         tion are independent processes because they both utilize the same extracted features for
                         classifying sounds.
                              Hence, the experiments in this study primarily aimed to determine the accuracy of the
                         sound classifiers. A 5-fold cross-validation technique was employed to assess the models,
                         where four folds were used for training with an (80%) training split and the remaining
                         portion was divided between testing and validation.

                         4.3. Platforms and Experimental Setup
                              In this section, we provide an overview of the various tools and materials used
                         in this study. The Python 3.10 package included the LibROSA 0.9.2 library, enabling
                         effective processing and extraction of the feature. For this research, we have selected the
                         LibROSA package to extract meaningful features from sound data. One reason for this
                         choice is that LibROSA is compatible with Arm-based processors. We can use the librosa
                         package in conjunction with the scikit-learn Python library, which is useful for our analysis.
                         Additionally, the scikit-learn 1.0.2 Python library was implemented. The experiments
                         served as a reference and were carried out on a laptop. The laptop used in the experiments
                         featured an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-9850H CPU running Windows 10.
                              One objective of this study was to execute a pre-trained model on an embedded
                         system while maintaining high accuracy and low inference times, thus allowing for a fair
                         comparison with laptop performance.

                         5. Optimizing Models: Toward Integration with Embedded Systems
                               Before initiating experimentation on embedded devices, it is critical to comprehend
                         the limitations that ensue from the constraints imposed by the device’s design. These con-
                         straints comprise computational and power limitations that are pivotal to determining the
                         practicality of reversing the computing process on the devices. It is pertinent to acknowl-
                         edge that the majority of embedded devices operate on battery power, thereby further
                         exacerbating the computational constraints of DL models that have become increasingly
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                        14 of 27




                         voluminous and intricate in recent years. Furthermore, the high computational demands of
                         these models translate into substantial time requirements and power consumption.
                              The process of embedding models in embedded devices is crucial to adhere to a set
                         of meticulously defined procedures. Among these procedures, one of the most pivotal
                         involves adapting the model to the target platform, ensuring compatibility, and optimizing
                         performance.
                              This procedure can be observed in Figure 6, which provides a comprehensive overview
                         of the essential tools and techniques utilized in the process of embedding DL models onto
                         various embedded devices. At the top of the training architecture, we employed the
                         TensorFlow framework to train our CNN-1D model. Subsequently, we performed post-
                         training quantization (PTQ) or quantized-aware training (QAT) to convert the floating-point
                         models into fixed-point models. Further details regarding the specific tools used to compile
                         the quantized models for different platforms can be found in the subsequent section. At
                         the conclusion of our study, a comprehensive listing of the diverse embedded platforms
                         that were employed is presented.




                         Figure 6. Tools for Embedding Deep Learning Models on Diverse Embedded Devices.

                              The TensorFlow framework, which serves as a prominent general-purpose platform,
                         was utilized at the forefront of our results to enable the training of the CNN-1D model.
                         Moreover, to facilitate the embedding of the model on embedded devices and mobile
                         platforms, we also employed TensorFlow Lite (TFLite) [38], which is a specialized extension
                         optimized for such settings. Additionally, these tools facilitate the optimization of the
                         complexity of the model while retaining its original level of accuracy.

                         5.1. Platforms
                             The general-purpose embedded platform was used to implement our models and
                         evaluate their performance, as depicted in Figure 7.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                               15 of 27




                         Figure 7. On the (left), we have the general-purpose embedded platform, represented by the RPi 4 B,
                         while on the (right), we have the TPU-based platform, represented by the USB Coral TPU.

                         •    General-purpose embedded platform
                              3    The RPi 4B+ is equipped with 8 GB of RAM and a quad-core 64-bit BCM 2711
                                   SoC (ARM Cortex A72 cores) [39], which, according to previous benchmarks [40]
                                   conducted on deep learning, offers notably superior performance compared to
                                   its predecessors.
                         •    Platform that Utilizes TPU Technology
                              3    Google developed the USB Coral TPU, which is a dedicated hardware accelerator
                                   designed to improve the inference speed of quantized deep neural network
                                   models written in TFLite. It was initially introduced in 2017 [41] and employs
                                   a USB 3.0 interface for communication [42]. To evaluate the performance of the
                                   model, the USB Coral TPU is linked to a RPi 4B+ through a USB connection.

                         5.2. Optimizations
                              To achieve successful inference on an embedded platform, adjustments must be
                         made to the DL model to accommodate differences in architecture between a laptop and
                         the embedded platform. These adaptations serve to not only facilitate inference on the
                         embedded platform but also optimize the performance of the model. In this subsection, the
                         model optimization technique employed in this research will be elaborated on.

                         Model Quantization
                              Even though deep learning models are typically trained using floating-point numbers,
                         fixed-point representation generally yields superior performance on embedded devices.
                         To address this difference, the floating-point models are quantized, meaning that the
                         model parameters are converted from floating-point to fixed-point representation. This
                         quantization process played a vital role in optimizing the performance of our models on
                         embedded devices.
                         3    Post-Training Quantization (PTQ)
                              To convert a DL model from floating point to fixed point, one common method is PTQ,
                              which involves training the CNN-1D model using floating point and then quantizing
                              the weights after training. It is important to note that the precision of the numbers in
                              fixed-point representation affects the accuracy of the DL model. While it is possible
                              for accuracy to increase, it often decreases. Additionally, the number of bits required
                              for fixed-point representation may vary depending on the specific tool used, enabling
                              the conversion of a 32-bit floating point DL model into a fixed-point representation
                              with as few as 5-bit for the parameters.
                              In addition to Keras, TFLite [38] provides a range of resources for converting and de-
                              ploying models on embedded devices. It is primarily used for converting trained Keras
                              models from the ‘.h5’ format to the more compact ‘.tflite’ format, which is well suited
                              for the RPi and other embedded systems. Furthermore, TFLite offers a set of tools that
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                          16 of 27




                              can accelerate embedded inference or ensure high accuracy when using quantized
                              models. This paper utilized TFLite v2.5.0 to perform the aforementioned tasks.
                         3    Quantization Aware Training (QAT)
                              QAT is an alternative approach to PTQ, where quantized parameters are utilized
                              during the model training process. Although QAT is more time-consuming than PTQ,
                              it is more accurate or has a smaller accuracy loss after quantization. However, it
                              should be noted that the model error used to update the parameters during training is
                              still calculated as a floating-point number in QAT.
                              Although TF supports QAT, the model parameters are stored as 32-bit floating point
                              numbers. Therefore, additional quantization using TFLite was necessary after training
                              the model. Additionally, TensorFlow allows only fixed-point numbers of 8, 16, or
                              32-bit. Despite its greater flexibility, TFLite is the preferred option.

                         5.3. Tool Flows
                              The embedding of CNN models may necessitate the use of various tools and additional
                         steps, which are platform dependent.

                         Tool Flows for TPU
                              The fixed structure of TPUs imposes limitations on model optimization. To perform
                         inference on TPU, the models must be quantized to an 8-bit integer format. The quantized
                         models then need to be compiled for the TPU using Google’s Edge TPU compiler [43]. The
                         Edge TPU compiler converts a “.tflite” model into a TPU-compatible format and handles
                         the mapping of unsupported operations to the host CPU. Figure 8 depicts the tool flow
                         used for deploying a model on a coral device.




                         Figure 8. The process of embedding a model onto the Coral Dev Board can be divided into
                         two fundamental stages. At the forefront lies the conventional training methodology, while the
                         subsequent steps involve exporting the trained model to the boar board (emerging) at the base.

                              It is a noteworthy consideration that the TPU compiler has a critical constraint, as
                         it cannot support the execution of all operations, and consequently, some operations
                         are offloaded to the CPU [38]. Furthermore, in the current iteration of the compiler, all
                         operations subsequent to the initial non-supported operation are also mapped onto the
                         CPU [44]. The CPU’s performance is inferior to that of the TPU, thereby rendering the
                         model’s architecture a significant factor in determining its performance on the TPU [45].
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                    17 of 27




                         6. Evaluating Pre-Trained Model for ESR on Various Platforms
                               In this section, we provide the experimental results achieved from using various
                         platforms. The aim of this study was to ascertain whether combining a pre-trained model
                         can lead to enhanced accuracy and a shortened inference time. Additionally, we aim to
                         explore the advantages of a pre-trained model for embedded systems. The experimental
                         results in this section are divided into three categories: evaluation on a laptop, assessment
                         using an RPi, and evaluation on both the RPi and TPU platforms.
                               First, the ANN and CNN-1D classifiers were assessed using the BDlib, ESC-10, and
                         Urban Sound datasets. In addition to this section, the results obtained are compared to
                         the performance documented in the existing literature. In the second phase, three datasets
                         were evaluated on a laptop, and the accuracy and inference time were compared to assess
                         the potential of a pre-trained model in this context. It is widely acknowledged that model
                         accuracy diminishes as the number of parameters increases. We employed two models: the
                         first with a small number of parameters, as depicted in Section 3.2.1, and the second with a
                         significantly larger number of parameters, as depicted in Section 3.2.2. Lastly, all proposed
                         solutions were assessed on an embedded system. A solution for faster performance was
                         found when we used an RPi with a Coral TPU.

                         6.1. Evaluation on PC
                              In this section, we assess the two proposed models for ESR, as described in Section 3.2.
                         The experimental results for the ESC-10, BDLib, and Urban Sound datasets are presented
                         in Tables 5–7, respectively. The evaluation of the BDLib dataset revealed that the ANN
                         classifier not only outperformed the other classifiers in terms of F1 Micro but also in other
                         metrics. However, this superior performance comes at the expense of a higher inference
                         time. A similar trend is observed when assessing classifiers for the Urban Sound dataset,
                         with the ANN classifier demonstrating the highest accuracy and favorable inference time.
                         However, the CNN-1D demonstrated higher accuracy when applied to the BDLib and
                         Urban Sound datasets. Figure 9, shows the accuracy and inference times for all the datasets
                         for the two models.

                         Table 5. F1 scores and classification times were measured for the two models using the ESC-10 dataset.
                         The solution with the highest F1 score is indicated.

                               Models         Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro            F1 Macro          F1 Weighted
                               ANN               0.157 ± 0.002            0.957               0.957               0.957
                              CNN-1D             0.303 ± 0.002            0.966               0.967               0.966


                         Table 6. F1 scores and classification times were measured for the two models using the BDLiB dataset.
                         The solution with the highest F1 score is indicated.

                               Models         Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro            F1 Macro          F1 Weighted
                               ANN               0.278 ± 0.003            1.000               1.000               1.000
                              CNN-1D             0.4397 ± 0.010           0.996               0.996               0.996


                         Table 7. F1 scores and classification times were measured for the two models using the Urban Sound
                         dataset. The solution with the highest F1 score is indicated.

                               Models         Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro            F1 Macro          F1 Weighted
                               ANN               0.107 ± 0.001            0.999               0.987               0.990
                              CNN-1D             0.252 ± 0.003            0.976               0.973               0.976
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                        18 of 27




                                            (a) Accuracy                                    (b) Inference Time
                         Figure 9. Evaluation of accuracy (F1 micro) and inference time for all datasets using our proposed models.

                         6.2. Evaluation on Embedded System
                              An advanced embedded system, the RPi 4B+, was employed to assess the various
                         models. The choice of this embedded platform was driven by its ability to replicate the
                         experiments conducted on a laptop without requiring significant modifications. Utilizing
                         alternative embedded platforms may present challenges due to the need for proprietary
                         tools, specialized ML support, and unique implementations when compared to open-source
                         alternatives or different libraries. Furthermore, several traditional ML techniques may
                         not be supported by certain platforms. The main factors to consider when applying the
                         mentioned approaches are accuracy and computational speed. Although the accuracy
                         is expected to remain consistent, there is likely to be a significant increase in the overall
                         execution time. The latter is crucial for real-time recognition and relevant when selecting
                         the audio frame size.

                         6.2.1. Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) without Quantization
                              In order to evaluate models on embedded platforms, they must be converted to
                         TFLite [38], which is a framework specifically designed for deploying ML algorithms
                         on embedded devices. TFLite converts a pre-trained TensorFlow model into a more
                         compact version, enabling its deployment on embedded systems. Tables 8–10 display
                         the performance of the full-precision TFLite models on the RPi 4B+. It is important to
                         note that the accuracy remained consistent with the measurements obtained on a laptop.
                         Interestingly, the inference time does not significantly change, as expected when executing
                         on constrained embedded devices. This can be attributed to the optimization of advanced
                         embedded devices, such as the RPi 4 B+, to efficiently support DL-based models in recent
                         years. Consequently, there is no compromise in terms of time or accuracy when migrating
                         models to these embedded platforms. In Figure 10, the accuracy and inference time of all
                         the used datasets are presented.

                         Table 8. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite without quantization on the ESC-10 dataset.

                               Models          Inference Time (ms)        F1 Micro             F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                                ANN              0.605 ± 0.024              0.964                0.965                0.965
                               CNN-1D            20.448 ± 0.647             0.964                0.965                0.965


                         Table 9. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite without Quantization on the BDLiB Dataset.

                               Models          Inference Time (ms)        F1 Micro             F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                                ANN              0.601 ± 0.024              1.000                1.000                1.000
                               CNN-1D            20.498 ± 0.575             1.000                1.000                1.000


                         Table 10. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite without Quantization on the Urban Sound Dataset.

                               Models          Inference Time (ms)        F1 Micro             F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                                ANN              0.581 ± 0.032              0.953                0.962                0.953
                               CNN-1D            20.506 ± 0.045             0.953                0.963                0.953
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                   19 of 27




                                          (a) Accuracy                                  (b) Inference Time
                         Figure 10. Evaluation of accuracy (F1 micro) and inference time for all datasets using our proposed
                         models with post-training quantization (PTQ) without quantization.

                         6.2.2. Post-Training Quantization (PTQ) with Quantization
                              The converted model can be either a full-precision, 32-bit floating-point model or
                         an 8-bit integer model achieved through post-training quantization. Several constrained
                         embedded devices or hardware accelerators, such as TensorFlow Processing Units, support
                         only quantized models. Quantized models provide advantages in terms of reduced size and
                         potentially improved speed compared with non-quantized alternatives. Nevertheless, the
                         process of quantization unavoidably results in some loss of information, which can affect
                         the accuracy achieved. Tables 11–13 present the performance of our proposed model when
                         quantized to 8-bit integers. Despite a slight decrease in accuracy following quantization,
                         the speed improvement is only marginally noticeable compared with the non-quantized
                         TFLite models (Figure 11).




                                           (a) Accuracy                                  (b) Inference Time
                         Figure 11. Evaluation of accuracy (F1 micro) and inference time for all datasets using our proposed
                         models with post-training quantization (PTQ) with quantization.

                         Table 11. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite and post-training quantization with 8-bit on the ESC-
                         10 dataset.

                               Models        Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro           F1 Macro            F1 Weighted
                               ANN             0.088 ± 0.010             0.962              0.963                0.963
                              CNN-1D           21.434 ± 0.491            0.960              0.961                0.961


                         Table 12. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite and post-training quantization with 8-bit on the
                         BDLiB dataset.

                               Models        Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro           F1 Macro            F1 Weighted
                               ANN             0.090 ± 0.016             1.000              1.000                1.000
                              CNN-1D           21.383 ± 0.712            1.000              1.000                1.000
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                  20 of 27




                         Table 13. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite and post-training quantization with 8-bit on the Urban
                         Sound dataset.

                               Models        Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro           F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                               ANN             0.089 ± 0.008             0.954              0.964               0.954
                              CNN-1D           21.442 ± 0.365            0.952              0.961               0.952


                         6.2.3. Quantization Aware Training (QAT)
                              In this section, the classification accuracy of QAT 8-bit for the ANN and CNN-1D
                         models is presented. It is evident that the accuracy of the ANN model, as shown in
                         Tables 14 and 15 for Esc-10 and BDLib, respectively, is slightly higher compared to the
                         CNN-1D model. However, in Table 16, there is a slight increase in the classification
                         accuracy for the Urban Sound dataset using the CNN-1D model (Figure 12).

                         Table 14. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite and quantization-aware training with 8-bit on the ESC-
                         10 dataset.

                               Models        Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro           F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                               ANN             0.125 ± 0.010             0.953              0.954               0.954
                              CNN-1D           19.211 ± 0.276            0.824              0.825               0.825


                         Table 15. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite and quantization-aware training with 8-bit on the
                         BDLib dataset.

                               Models        Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro           F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                               ANN             0.121 ± 0.0131            1.000              1.000               1.000
                              CNN-1D           19.087 ± 0.712            0.912              0.913               0.913


                         Table 16. Evaluation of RPi using TFLite and quantization-aware training with 8-bit on the Urban
                         Sound dataset.

                               Models        Inference Time (ms)       F1 Micro           F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                               ANN             0.121 ± 0.009             0.942              0.950               0.944
                              CNN-1D           18.856 ± 0.171            0.951              0.960               0.951




                                          (a) Accuracy                                  (b) Inference Time
                         Figure 12. Evaluation of accuracy (F1 micro) and inference time for all datasets using our proposed
                         models with quantization-aware training (QAT).

                         6.3. Evaluation on RPi4 and Coral TPU
                               In this section, we employ quantization-aware training (QAT) to implement two mod-
                         els, ANN and CNN-1D, on the Coral TPU. Our objective was to evaluate the performance
                         and accuracy of these models by utilizing Coral TPU hardware.

                         Post-Training Quantization (PTQ)
                             Likewise, the two models are assessed on the embedded platform, this time with Coral
                         TPU. While the accuracy is anticipated to be comparable to the results on the PC and RPI
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                     21 of 27




                         without Coral TPU, the execution time might improve when adapting the approach to an
                         embedded device with Coral TPU. Tables 17–19 display the accuracy and classification
                         times achieved when using Coral TPU in post-training quantization using 8-bit. In this case,
                         the accuracy remained consistent with the measurements on the PC, while the classification
                         time for the ANN model increased. However, unlike the CNN-1D standalone, where the
                         timings decreased by three milliseconds on the RPi, the ANN model time only increased
                         slightly, as shown in Figure 13.

                         Table 17. Evaluation of the ESC-10 dataset using RPi with Coral TPU and post-training quantization
                         (PTQ) with 8-bit.

                               Models         Inference Time (ms)        F1 Micro            F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                               ANN              1.003 ± 0.405              0.957               0.957               0.957
                              CNN-1D            17.669 ± 2.243             0.955               0.956               0.956


                         Table 18. Evaluation of the BDLiB dataset using RPi with Coral TPU and post-training quantization
                         (PTQ) with 8-bit.

                               Models         Inference Time (ms)        F1 Micro            F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                               ANN              1.035 ± 0.576              1.000               1.000               1.000
                              CNN-1D            17.665 ± 1.581             1.000               1.000               1.000


                         Table 19. Evaluation of the Urban Sound dataset using RPi with Coral TPU and post-training
                         quantization (PTQ) with 8-bit.

                               Models         Inference Time (ms)        F1 Micro            F1 Macro           F1 Weighted
                               ANN              1.027 ± 0.347              0.952               0.962               0.953
                              CNN-1D            18.095 ± 1.120             0.954               0.963               0.954




                                           (a) Accuracy                                   (b) Inference Time
                         Figure 13. Evaluation of the accuracy (F1 micro) and inference time for all datasets using our proposed
                         two models with Coral TPU and post-training quantization (PTQ).

                         6.4. ESR Comparison: State-of-the-Art CNNs
                               The effectiveness of the suggested approach was evaluated in relation to existing
                         literature reviews that utilize the same datasets. We compared the accuracy of our proposed
                         approach with the highest accuracy recently reported in the literature, as demonstrated
                         in Table 20. The methodology proposed in [46] achieved the highest level of accuracy by
                         employing Mel-Spectrogram features in conjunction with the ResNet-152 and DenseNet-161
                         models. In [25], two CNN models with data augmentation were presented. The authors
                         utilized Log-Mel audio feature extraction, with the primary distinction being that the
                         first model incorporates max-pooling while the second one does not. Unfortunately, both
                         proposed models demonstrate increasing accuracy, but their large size imposes excessive
                         memory demands that are impractical for embedded platforms. Furthermore, there is
                         additional research that utilizes a similar implementation approach but employs different
                         methodologies, unlike the one proposed by [29].
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                             22 of 27




                              The proposed methodology significantly improves accuracy, achieving 95.70% and
                         96.60% accuracy, respectively, for ESC-10, 100% and 99.60% for BDLiB, and 99.90% and
                         97.60% for UrbanSound datasets.
                              Our methodology offers several anticipated advantages, including significant speed
                         enhancements over current state-of-the-art solutions and compatibility with embedded
                         devices due to its lower memory requirements.

                         Table 20. Evaluation of Recent Sound Classifiers Based on CNNs Using Multiple Datasets.

                              References              Year           ESC-10            BDLib            Urban Sound
                                   [46]               2021            94.94               -                  -
                                   [25]               2020            94.90               -                  -
                                   [29]               2021            91.25               -                  -
                                    [6]               2021            90.71             97.25              83.00
                                   [14]               2021            83.25             74.44              63.05
                              Proposed ANN            2023            95.73              100               99.96
                              Proposed CNN            2023            96.66             99.66              97.61


                         7. Discussion

                               In this section below, a comparison will be made between two platforms: a 32-bit PC
                         versus a Raspberry Pi, and a Raspberry Pi versus a Coral TPU 8-bit enabled Raspberry Pi.
                               The measured accuracy remained rather consistent when they are embedded. This fact
                         can be associated with the fact that the parameters and architecture of the pre-trained model
                         are not affected by deployment on the embedded device. According to our analysis, the
                         accuracy of the proposed models ranged between 95 and 100% for the datasets used. This
                         represents a higher range than the other research, as depicted in Table 20. Although Coral
                         TPU is a new commercial device, all details are presented in Section 5.1. This facilitated
                         the use of this technique in edge computing; however, it did not support all operations.
                         Nonetheless, the measurement of QAT in Coral TPU is beyond the scope of this paper.
                               Our measurements demonstrated high accuracy in environmental sound classifica-
                         tion. One notable implication arising from the consistent accuracy observed when deploying
                         the models on embedded devices is the significant potential it holds for real-world appli-
                         cations. These findings strongly indicate that the models perform robustly and reliably,
                         even when operating on resource-constrained platforms such as the RPi. Consequently,
                         this opens up a wide range of possibilities for implementing sound classification systems
                         in edge computing scenarios, where processing is conducted locally on the device rather
                         than relying on cloud-based solutions. The ability to achieve high accuracy on embedded
                         devices greatly enhances their suitability for diverse applications, including Internet of
                         Things (IoT) devices, smart homes, and surveillance systems.
                               Additionally, we include two models proposed in our comparison in Section 3.2. The
                         summary depicted in Figure 14 illustrates the attainable accuracies of the two distinct
                         platforms for both models. The dependence on the dataset was significant. The ANN
                         model achieved the highest accuracy for three datasets, while the CNN-1D model had a
                         slightly lower accuracy compared to the ANN model. However, the performance of both
                         models was comparable when evaluated on the BDLib dataset. The cost of achieving high
                         accuracy with the ANN and CNN-1D models was reflected in their classification times.
                         Figure 15 illustrates the classification and inference times for the ANN and CNN-1D models.
                         The CNN-1D model required a significantly higher time cost to achieve this accuracy.
                         In particular, when considering embedded platforms, the difference in performance can be
                         as high as 20 times that of an ANN model.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                           23 of 27




                         Figure 14. Comparison of accuracy (F1 micro score) of proposed models between PC and RPi.




                         Figure 15. Comparison of classification time of proposed models between PC and RPi.

                              The selection of audio frame size during windowing directly affects the total execu-
                         tion time. By considering experimental timings and assuming that audio recognition is
                         performed in streaming mode with a 50% overlap between audio frames, the minimum
                         windowing size is determined based on the time required for feature extraction.
                              The determination of shorter audio frame sizes depends on both the feature extraction
                         time and the chosen platform. However, larger audio frame sizes can lead to power
                         savings in embedded devices due to shorter feature extraction and classification times
                         in comparison to the audio frame size. This observation provides invaluable insights for
                         optimizing power consumption in resource-constrained environments. By meticulously
                         selecting the audio frame size based on feature extraction time and platform capabilities, it
                         becomes possible to strike a harmonious balance between accuracy and energy efficiency.
                         This consideration assumes particular relevance in applications where power-saving modes
                         are crucial, such as portable devices and battery-powered systems.
                              Figure 16 outlines the attainable accuracies for both ANN and CNN-1D models in
                         RPi and RPi with Coral TPU. The dependence on the dataset was quite evident. The ANN
                         model reached the highest accuracy for three datasets, while the CNN-1D model had
                         a negligibly lower accuracy than the ANN model. Regardless, the performances of the
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                            24 of 27




                         ANN and CNN-1D models were comparable when evaluated using the BDLib dataset.
                         The trade-off for achieving high accuracy with these models is evident in their respective
                         classification times.




                         Figure 16. Comparison of accuracy (F1 micro score) of proposed models between RPi and RPi with
                         Coral TPU.

                               Figure 17 displays the classification and inference times for the ANN and CNN-1D
                         models. The CNN-1D model requires a significantly greater time investment to achieve such
                         accuracy, particularly when considering embedded platforms. On embedded platforms,
                         the time cost of the CNN-1D model was up to 20 times higher than that of the ANN model.




                         Figure 17. Comparison of classification time of proposed models between RPi and RPi with
                         Coral TPU.

                               Nevertheless, the strength of our approach lies in its ability to achieve comparable clas-
                         sification accuracy on embedded devices such as laptops. An important aspect that emerges
                         from the research is the trade-off between accuracy and computational performance when
                         comparing the ANN and CNN-1D models. Across multiple datasets, the ANN model
                         consistently achieves higher accuracy, albeit at the cost of slightly lower accuracy for the
                         CNN-1D model. Nevertheless, it is crucial to consider the computational cost associated
                         with these models, especially when deployed on embedded platforms. The CNN-1D
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                25 of 27




                         model necessitates significantly more time for classification and inference, rendering it less
                         efficient in terms of execution time. This trade-off assumes paramount significance when
                         selecting the most appropriate model for specific applications. If attaining high accuracy is
                         of utmost importance and computational resources are not a constraint, the CNN-1D model
                         may prove to be a suitable choice. Conversely, if computational efficiency is a priority, the
                         ANN model would represent a more favorable option.
                               Another key finding from the research underscores the considerable impact of the chosen
                         dataset on model performance. While the ANN model consistently achieves the highest
                         accuracy across three datasets, the relative performance of the models varies depending
                         on the specific dataset employed. This necessitates recognition of the fact that the models’
                         generalizability to unseen or diverse datasets may differ significantly. Hence, when applying
                         these models to new sound classification tasks, it becomes imperative to carefully consider
                         the characteristics of the specific dataset and evaluate their performance accordingly. This
                         highlights the utmost importance of dataset selection, diversity, and augmentation techniques
                         to ensure the models’ robustness and adaptability in real-world scenarios.
                               In light of these research findings, it is essential to emphasize the need for future
                         investigations into power consumption aspects encompassing feature extraction, training,
                         inference time, and sound classification processes. Conducting a comprehensive analysis of
                         power consumption would engender a more comprehensive understanding of the energy
                         requirements associated with sound classification systems. This analysis, in turn, could
                         serve as a guide for developing power-efficient models and algorithms explicitly tailored
                         for embedded devices. Additionally, future research should explore techniques such as
                         quantized-aware training (QAT) to optimize model performance and resource utilization
                         on emerging hardware platforms such as the Coral TPU.
                               In conclusion, the research findings offer valuable insights into the implications and
                         limitations of deploying sound classification models on different platforms. The consistent
                         accuracy observed on embedded devices, the trade-offs between model performance,
                         dataset dependency, audio frame size considerations, and the focus on power consumption
                         analysis collectively contribute to a deeper understanding of the practical applicability and
                         optimization of sound classification systems in real-world scenarios. These findings pave
                         the way for further advancements in the field of edge computing, wherein accurate and
                         efficient sound classification can be achieved on resource-constrained devices.

                         8. Conclusions
                              The primary objective of our research is to showcase the potential of a pre-trained
                         model to compete in terms of classification accuracy for ESR on embedded systems. Addi-
                         tionally, these models can attain accuracy results similar to those obtained using laptops.
                         However, it is crucial to consider the trade-off between the increased classification time
                         associated with these models. While this time cost is manageable on non-embedded plat-
                         forms, it becomes significantly amplified when considering computational limitations on
                         devices such as the RPi.
                              The results obtained indicate that pre-trained models are suitable for embedded de-
                         vices owing to their resource efficiency. Nevertheless, experiments conducted on inference
                         time revealed that larger model parameters pose difficulties for embedded devices, leading
                         to increased inference time compared to laptops because of limited resources. Although
                         there was a slight improvement in the inference time when applying the Coral TPU, it was
                         negligible. Furthermore, we encountered limitations with the Coral TPU when deploying
                         our QAT model, as it does not support all operations.

                         Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.L., M.Y.C. and A.T.; methodology, M.L.; software, M.L.;
                         validation, M.L.; investigation, M.L.; data curation, M.L.; writing—original draft preparation, M.L.;
                         writing—review and editing, M.L.; visualization, M.L.; supervision, M.Y.C. and A.T. All authors have
                         read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                         Funding: This research received no external funding.
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                          26 of 27




                                  Data Availability Statement: The data are available on demand.
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Ozkan, Y.; Barkana, B.D. Forensic audio analysis and event recognition for smart surveillance systems. In Proceedings of the
      2019 IEEE International Symposium on Technologies for Homeland Security (HST), Woburn, MA, USA, 5–6 November 2019;
      pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
2.    Adamson, A. Paris Testing Noise Radar System That Can Identify Furthermore, Ticket Loud Cars. 2019. Available online:
      https://www.techtimes.com/articles/245203/20190902/paris-testing-noise-radar-system-that-can-identify-and-ticket-loud-
      cars.htm (accessed on 19 March 2023).
3.    López, J.M.; Alonso, J.; Asensio, C.; Pavón, I.; Gascó, L.; de Arcas, G. A Digital Signal Processor Based Acoustic Sensor for
      Outdoor Noise Monitoring in Smart Cities. Sensors 2020, 20, 605. [CrossRef]
4.    da Silva, B.; Happi, A.W.; Braeken, A.; Touhafi, A. Evaluation of classical machine learning techniques towards urban sound
      recognition on embedded systems. Appl. Sci. 2019, 9, 3885. [CrossRef]
5.    Piczak, K.J. Environmental sound classification with convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE 25th
      International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP), Boston, MA, USA, 17–20 September 2015; pp. 1–6.
6.    Lhoest, L.; Lamrini, M.; Vandendriessche, J.; Wouters, N.; da Silva, B.; Chkouri, M.Y.; Touhafi, A. MosAIc: A Classical Machine
      Learning Multi-Classifier Based Approach against Deep learning Classifiers for Embedded Sound Classification. Appl. Sci. 2021,
      11, 8394. [CrossRef]
7.    Shah, S.K.; Tariq, Z.; Lee, Y. Iot based urban noise monitoring in deep learning using historical reports. In Proceedings of the
      2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Los Angeles, CA, USA, 9–12 December 2019; pp. 4179–4184.
8.    Nordby, J. Environmental Sound Classification on Microcontrollers Using Convolutional Neural Networks. Master’s Thesis,
      Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Oslo, Norway, 2019.
9.    Huzaifah, M. Comparison of time-frequency representations for environmental sound classification using convolutional neural
      networks. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1706.07156.
10.   Zinemanas, P.; Cancela, P.; Rocamora, M. End-to-end convolutional neural networks for sound event detection in urban
      environments. In Proceedings of the 2019 24th Conference of Open Innovations Association (FRUCT), Moscow, Russia,
      8–12 April 2019; pp. 533–539.
11.   Mendoza, J.M.; Tan, V.; Fuentes, V.; Perez, G.; Tiglao, N.M. Audio event detection using wireless sensor networks based
      on deep learning. In Proceedings of the Wireless Internet: 11th EAI International Conference, WiCON 2018, Taipei, Taiwan,
      15–16 October 2018; Proceedings 11; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 105–115.
12.   Piczak, K.J. ESC: Dataset for environmental sound classification. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM International Conference on
      Multimedia, Brisbane, Australia, 26–30 October 2015; pp. 1015–1018.
13.   Mu, W.; Yin, B.; Huang, X.; Xu, J.; Du, Z. Environmental sound classification using temporal-frequency attention based
      convolutional neural network. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 21552. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.   Vandendriessche, J.; Wouters, N.; da Silva, B.; Lamrini, M.; Chkouri, M.Y.; Touhafi, A. Environmental sound recognition on
      embedded systems: From FPGAs to TPUs. Electronics 2021, 10, 2622. [CrossRef]
15.   Sony, S.; Gamage, S.; Sadhu, A.; Samarabandu, J. Multiclass damage identification in a full-scale bridge using optimally tuned
      one-dimensional convolutional neural network. J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 2022, 36, 04021035. [CrossRef]
16.   Bountourakis, V.; Vrysis, L.; Papanikolaou, G. Machine learning algorithms for environmental sound recognition: Towards sound-
      scape semantics. In Proceedings of the Audio Mostly 2015 on Interaction with Sound, Thessaloniki, Greece, 7–9 October 2015;
      pp. 1–7.
17.   bbc.co.uk. BBC Sound Effects. BDLib2 Environmental Sound Dataset-M3C. Available online: http://m3c.web.auth.gr/research/
      datasets/bdlib/ (accessed on 19 March 2023).
18.   Font, F.; Roma, G.; Serra, X. Freesound technical demo. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
      Barcelona, Spain, 21–25 October 2013; pp. 411–412.
19.   Salamon, J.; Jacoby, C.; Bello, J.P. A dataset and taxonomy for urban sound research. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International
      Conference on Multimedia, Orlando, FL, USA, 3–7 November 2014; pp. 1041–1044.
20.   Abiodun, O.I.; Jantan, A.; Omolara, A.E.; Dada, K.V.; Umar, A.M.; Linus, O.U.; Arshad, H.; Kazaure, A.A.; Gana, U.; Kiru, M.U.
      Comprehensive review of artificial neural network applications to pattern recognition. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 158820–158846.
      [CrossRef]
21.   Haykin, S.S. Neural Networks and Learning Machines; Pearson: London, UK, 2009.
22.   Liakos, K.G.; Busato, P.; Moshou, D.; Pearson, S.; Bochtis, D. Machine learning in agriculture: A review. Sensors 2018, 18, 2674.
      [CrossRef]
23.   Abayomi-Alli, O.O.; Damaševičius, R.; Qazi, A.; Adedoyin-Olowe, M.; Misra, S. Data Augmentation and Deep Learning Methods
      in Sound Classification: A Systematic Review. Electronics 2022, 11, 3795. [CrossRef]
24.   Ahmed, M.R.; Robin, T.I.; Shafin, A.A. Automatic environmental sound recognition (aesr) using convolutional neural network.
      Int. J. Mod. Educ. Comput. Sci. 2020, 12, 41–54. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2023, 23, 6227                                                                                                              27 of 27




25.   Mushtaq, Z.; Su, S.F. Environmental sound classification using a regularized deep convolutional neural network with data
      augmentation. Appl. Acoust. 2020, 167, 107389. [CrossRef]
26.   Valero, X.; Alias, F. Gammatone cepstral coefficients: Biologically inspired features for non-speech audio classification. IEEE Trans.
      Multimed. 2012, 14, 1684–1689. [CrossRef]
27.   Cotton, C.V.; Ellis, D.P. Spectral vs. spectro-temporal features for acoustic event detection. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE
      Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA), New Paltz, NY, USA, 16–19 October 2011;
      pp. 69–72.
28.   Navon, D.; Bronstein, A.M. Random Search Hyper-Parameter Tuning: Expected Improvement Estimation and the Corresponding
      Lower Bound. arXiv 2022, arXiv:2208.08170.
29.   Tsalera, E.; Papadakis, A.; Samarakou, M. Comparison of pre-trained cnns for audio classification using transfer learning. J. Sens.
      Actuator Netw. 2021, 10, 72. [CrossRef]
30.   Pan, S.J.; Yang, Q. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 2010, 22, 1345–1359. [CrossRef]
31.   Oquab, M.; Bottou, L.; Laptev, I.; Sivic, J. Learning and transferring mid-level image representations using convolutional
      neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Columbus, OH, USA,
      23–28 June 2014; pp. 1717–1724.
32.   TensorFlow Hub. Available online: https://tfhub.dev/google/yamnet/1 (accessed on 4 May 2023).
33.   Brusa, E.; Delprete, C.; Di Maggio, L.G. Deep transfer learning for machine diagnosis: From sound and music recognition to
      bearing fault detection. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 11663. [CrossRef]
34.   Howard, A.G.; Zhu, M.; Chen, B.; Kalenichenko, D.; Wang, W.; Weyand, T.; Andreetto, M.; Adam, H. Mobilenets: Efficient
      convolutional neural networks for mobile vision applications. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1704.04861.
35.   Models/Research/Audioset/Yamnet at Master · Tensorflow/Models · GitHub. Available online: https://github.com/tensorflow/
      models/tree/master/research/audioset/yamnet (accessed on 23 February 2023).
36.   Johnson, K.; Johnson, K. Acoustic and auditory phonetics. Phonetica 2004, 61, 56–58. [CrossRef]
37.   Sharma, G.; Umapathy, K.; Krishnan, S. Trends in audio signal feature extraction methods. Appl. Acoust. 2020, 158, 107020.
      [CrossRef]
38.   TensorFlow Lite. Available online: https://www.tensorflow.org/lite/guide (accessed on 3 January 2023).
39.   Raspberry Pi 4 Computer Model B. Available online: https://www.raspberrypi.org (accessed on 23 February 2023).
40.   Benchmarking Machine Learning on the New Raspberry Pi 4, Model-Hackster.io. Available online: https://www.hackster.io/
      news/benchmarking-machine-learning-on-the-new-raspberry-pi-4-model-b-88db9304ce4 (accessed on 17 January 2023).
41.   Jouppi, N.P.; Young, C.; Patil, N.; Patterson, D.; Agrawal, G.; Bajwa, R.; Bates, S.; Bhatia, S.; Boden, N.; Borchers, A.; et al.
      In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Symposium on
      Computer Architecture, Toronto, ON, Canada, 24–28 June 2017; pp. 1–12.
42.   USB Accelerator Datasheet|Coral. Available online: https://coral.ai/docs/accelerator/datasheet (accessed on 18 February 2023).
43.   Edge TPU Compiler|Coral. Available online: https://coral.ai/docs/edgetpu/compiler/#system-requirements (accessed on
      18 February 2023).
44.   TensorFlow Models on the Edge TPU|Coral. Available online: https://coral.ai/docs/edgetpu/models-intro (accessed on
      18 February 2023).
45.   Rancaño, X.; Molanes, R.F.; González-Val, C.; Rodríguez-Andina, J.J.; Fariña, J. Performance evaluation of state-of-the-art edge
      computing devices for DNN inference. In Proceedings of the IECON 2020 the 46th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial
      Electronics Society, Singapore, 18–21 October 2020; pp. 2286–2291.
46.   Mushtaq, Z.; Su, S.F.; Tran, Q.V. Spectral images based environmental sound classification using CNN with meaningful data
      augmentation. Appl. Acoust. 2021, 172, 107581. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
