      Reliable Classification of High Explosive and Chemical/Biological
                       Artillery Using Acoustic Sensors
                        Sachi Desai1, Myron E. Hohil1, Henry Bass2 and Jim Chambers2
                              1
                                US Army RDECOM, Picatinny Arsenal, NJ 07806
                            Email: mhohil@pica.army.mil; sdesai@pica.army.mil;
                         2
                             National Center for Physical Acoustics, University, MS 38677
                                Email: pabass@olemiss.edul; chambers@olemiss.edu;

                                                           Abstract
           Feature extraction methods based on the discrete wavelet transform and multiresolution analysis are
           used to develop a robust classification algorithm that reliably discriminates between conventional and
           simulated chemical/biological artillery rounds via acoustic signals produced during detonation utilizing
           a generic acoustic sensor. Based on the transient properties of the signature blast distinct
           characteristics arise within the different acoustic signatures because high explosive warheads
           emphasize concussive and shrapnel effects, while chemical/biological warheads are designed to
           disperse their contents over large areas, therefore employing a slower burning, less intense explosive to
           mix and spread their contents. The ensuing blast waves are readily characterized by variations in the
           corresponding peak pressure and rise time of the blast, differences in the ratio of positive pressure
           amplitude to the negative amplitude, and variations in the overall duration of the resulting waveform.
           Unique attributes can also be identified that depend upon the properties of the gun tube, projectile
           speed at the muzzle, and the explosive burn rates of the warhead. The algorithm enables robust
           classification of various airburst signatures using acoustics. It is capable of being integrated within an
           existing chemical/biological sensor, a stand-alone generic sensor, or a part of a disparate sensor suite.
           When emplaced in high-threat areas, this added capability would further provide field personal with
           advanced battlefield knowledge without the aide of so-called "sniffer" sensors that rely upon air
           particle information based on direct contact with possible contaminated air. In this work, the discrete
           wavelet transform is used to extract the predominant components of these characteristics from air burst
           signatures at ranges exceeding 2km while maintaining temporal sequence of the data to keep relevance
           to the transient differences of the airburst signatures. Highly reliable discrimination is achieved with a
           feedforward neural network classifier trained on a feature space derived from the distribution of
           wavelet coefficients and higher frequency details found within different levels of the multiresolution
           decomposition the neural network then is capable of classifying new airburst signatures as
           Chemical/Biological or High Explosive.

           Keywords:      Acoustic Sensors, CBRN, Chemical, Biological, Neural Networks, Wavelets,
           Multiresolutional Analysis


                                                  1. INTRODUCTION


           The Army is currently developing acoustic overwatch sensor systems that will provide extended range
  surveillance, detection, and identification for force protection and tactical security on the battlefield. A network of such
  sensors remotely deployed in conjunction with a central processing node (or gateway) will provide early warning and
  assessment of enemy threats, near real-time situational awareness to commanders, and may reduce potential hazards to



142                                                                Chemical and Biological Sensing VI, edited by Patrick J. Gardner,
                                                                      Proceedings of SPIE Vol. 5795 (SPIE, Bellingham, WA, 2005)
                                                                                       0277-786X/05/$15 · doi: 10.1117/12.603688
the soldier. In contrast, the current detection of chemical/biological (CB) agents expelled into a battlefield environment
is limited to the response of chemical sensors that must be located within close proximity to the CB agent. Since
chemical sensors detect hazardous agents through contact, the sensor range to an airburst is the key-limiting factor in
identifying a potential CB weapon attack. The associated sensor reporting latencies must be minimized to give sufficient
preparation time to field commanders, who must assess if an attack is about to occur, has occurred, or if occurred, the
type of agent that soldiers might be exposed to. The long-range propagation of acoustic blast waves from heavy artillery
blasts, which are typical in a battlefield environment, introduces a feature for using acoustics and other disparate sensor
technologies for the early detection and identification of CB threats. Employing disparate sensor technologies implies
that warning of a potential CB attack can be provided to the solider more rapidly and from a safer distance when
compared to that which conventional methods allow. This capability facilitates the necessity of classifying the types of
rounds that have burst in a specified region in order to give both warning and provide identification of CB agents found
in the area. The added information integrated into the common operating picture will help field commanders (more)
accurately plan and execute measures that must be taken in order to ensure the proper precautions to a mission [10].
Such a warning system would also help reduce the time-consuming, manpower intensive and dangerous tasks associated
with identifying the airburst, allowing a field commander to make rapid and accurate judgments that insure greater safety
and lessen exposure for the soldiers.
          This paper supports acoustic sensor technologies to distinguish among conventional, i.e. high explosive (HE),
and CB artillery blasts using characteristics that remain discernible with long-range wave propagation and degradation,
firing time and detonation (either air or ground). The outcome illustrated herein is based on an analysis conducted using
acoustic signature data collected during two independent data collection exercises. The principal set of artillery blast
data was collected at YUMA Proving Ground on 11-12 August 1995 in a field test experiment conducted by the National
Center of Physical Acoustics NCPA at the University of Mississippi in cooperation with ARDEC (Picatinny Arsenal).
The reason for the experiment was to examine whether CB rounds could be discriminated from HE rounds via acoustic
and seismic sensor technologies. The field test included the detonation and/or airburst of three categories of explosive
rounds; two categories of artillery rounds considered close analogs to chemical and biological warheads, and HE rounds
most frequently used in the battlefield. The data set comprised of 8 ground impacts from HE rounds, 23 ground impacts
from a Type A CB round and 8 air-bursts from a Type B CB round. The data was collected at seven sensors sites as
shown in Figure 1. The rounds were fired from a self-propelled howitzer situated several kilometers to the west of a
linear array of 5 sensor locations designated along an axis offset from the firing radial by 700m. Sensor site S3
coincides with the ordinate axis of the estimated projectile impact point at 5km from the firing position. Microphones
were emplaced at sensor sites S2, S4, S1 and S5 at a distance of 500m, 600m, 1000m and 1200m from S3, respectively.
Geophones accompanied the microphones at positions S3 and S5, and a flash detector was emplaced at position S6, 2000
meters from S3. An acoustic transducer was positioned at site S7, 400m from S3 and in line with the estimated
projectile impact point.




                                  Figure 1 – Sensor Deployment at Yuma Proving Grounds

          A preliminary investigation conducted by researchers at the National Center for Physical Acoustics exposed
distinctive differences between airburst signatures from the three types of rounds, and a subsequent study identified
features within the blast waves that could be used to discriminate between HE and CB blasts acoustically [1]. In this
study, the rapid ignition of the HE rounds was found to generate larger amplitude, shorter duration signatures in contrast
to the longer duration signals representative of the slower burning phosphorus, ignited in the Type A shell upon ground


                                                                                               Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795   143
  impact. It was determined that, if previous information regarding range to the blast was understood, the amplitude alone
  would be adequate to identify a CB round from its conventional HE counterpart. Discriminating attributes such as high
  frequency precursor signals produced by the passing of supersonic shrapnel elements from the exterior of HE rounds
  were identified prior to the main blast wave and noticeable at ranges up to 1 km. Signatures for the Type B round
  illustrated a short duration pulse that precedes the slow burn of chemical agents, an aspect resulting from the ejection of
  the round from the canister.
            A second set of experimental data was collected at Dugway Proving Ground (DPG). The intention of this
  exercise was to examine if acoustic, seismic, and imagery sensors could be used to differentiate among conventional HE
  projectiles and those filled with either chemical and/or biological agents [2]. Two hundred and sixty rounds were fired,
  approximately half of which were fused to detonate on impact, while the other half were fused to detonate in the air.
  The HE rounds contained a larger amount of explosives when compared to the simulated chemical rounds that were
  developed to open at detonation and release a fill consisting of polyethylene glycol and water. The data examined in this
  paper was collected from three sensor sites arranged in a triangle and numbered with indication of the range from the
  detonation zone. Site 1 and site 3 were situated on the same radial line from the expected detonation area at ranges of
  540m and 1665m respectively. Site 2 was positioned 1026 m radially outward and 514 m to the left from the detonation
  area.
            The latter field test experiment has begun numerous studies that have created a wealth of research concerning
  the discrimination of HE and CB rounds using disparate sensor technologies [2-8]. In [7], characteristics found in the
  seismic signatures were identified to provide themselves well toward the discrimination of HE and CB artillery blasts,
  particularly in the case of the point detonation trials. This work applied time and frequency domain approaches to obtain
  features useful in the discrimination between HE and CB rounds. Wavelets were employed to de-noise the non-
  stationary signals and recreate the time domain information for use in discovering robust features. Explosion start and
  stop times were calculated and exploited to find the qualities found in the envelope information. Time domain
  discriminating features were identified, including the shrapnel noise reported in [1], and frequency domain features such
  as the instantaneous and maximum bandwidth. Acoustic features were also identified and presented in collaboration
  between the Edgewood Chemical Biological Center (ECBC) and Army Research Lab (ARL), in combination with
  seismic research conducted in [7] (c.f. [2-8]).
            The most prominent characteristics within each type of blast are readily identified in Figure 2; the high
  frequency precursors from the HE blast prior to the main blasts as shown in Figure 2a, the comparatively slow burn and
  weak under pressure associated with the Type A CB blast in Figure 2b, and a short duration pulse that precedes the slow
  burn of agents within the Type B Base ejection rounds shown in Figure 2c. In here, we identify range invariant features
  found within the multiresolution decomposition of the corresponding signatures in an attempt to further promote
  disparate sensor technology for CB/HE discrimination. The subsequent growth of a feature space representation for
  classification is based upon data acquired during separate data collection exercises, which when combined, introduce
  variations within the intraclass and interclass attributes for the HE and Type A CB classes of artillery blasts. This is
  principally due to the different types of payloads used to simulate CB rounds, differences in the local environment and
  data acquisition hardware used, and variations in range and aspect angle of the blasts with respect to sensor emplacement
  positions. We show that information extracted via different levels of decomposition produce repeatable properties that
  can be processed and combined to ensure consistently reliable discrimination between HE and CB blasts.




  Figure 2 – Acoustic Signatures from (a) HE blast recorded at DPG, (b) Type A Simulated CB Round burst recorded at DPG and (c)
  Air burst for the Type B White Phosphorus Base Injection round recorded at YPG



144   Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795
                              2. WAVELET FEATURE EXTRACTION FOR CLASSIFICATION

          In this paper, wavelet analysis is used to identify distinct, disjoint feature sets that remain consistent for a given
class of round, and do not degrade significantly with long-range propagation. Figure 2 shows the complex, non-
stationary response of the signatures to be evaluated, which are categorically poor candidates for feature extraction and
segmentation via Fourier analysis or the short-time Fourier Transform. On the other hand, the non-stationary, transient
and often oscillatory nature of these signals may be characterized proficiently with wavelet bases that effectively capture
the time-frequency distribution of such signal components. Wavelets are better suited for analyzing transient signals, as
they are well localized in time and in frequency, and are able to take into account the scale of multiple signal
components [10]. To this end, the wavelet transform can provide a scalable time-frequency representation of artillery
blast signatures and should uncover details that are not readily found using conventional signal processing techniques.
Noise components that are introduced into the blasts waves prior to being received at the sensor are also a serious
impediment to isolating features that can be used to efficiently characterize the signal. One useful feature of utilizing
wavelets in multiresolution analysis is that this noise can be isolated and removed from the baseband signal of interest; a
process referred to as wavelet denoising. Wavelet denoising is optimal in the sense that the process attempts to remove
noise components from signal components regardless of the frequency content of the signal, which is by far more
proficient than conventional filtering methods that retain baseband signal components and suppress high frequency
noise.

2.1 Discrete Wavelet Transform and Multiresolution Analysis

Derived from subband filters the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is based on a multiresolution decomposition of a
signal to give a coarser and coarser approximation to the original signal by removing high frequency detail at each level
of decomposition [11]. The wavelet transform, in other words is a multiresolution transform that maps low frequency
information of signals into a coarsely sampled subspace and maps high frequency information into more finely sampled
subspaces. The DWT is defined by the scaling function

                                                   φ (x) = 2 2     ∑ φ(
                                                               1 L −1

                                                                   k =0
                                                                          hk +1 2 x − k )                    (1)

and a wavelet function

                                                   ψ (x ) = 2 2    ∑ φ(
                                                               1 L −1

                                                                   k =0
                                                                          gk +1 2 x − k )                    (2)

where hk and g k are analysis filters. In order to retain the characteristics of the transient signals in question choosing
the appropriate wavelet filter is important. The choice of the wavelet scaling function should have properties similar to
the original signal because the quality of wavelet decomposition depends significantly on the ability to approximate the
signal with wavelets. The output of the wavelet transform shows the correlation between the signal and wavelet as a
function of time. The easiest method for selecting a wavelet is to copy a signal’s time-frequency behavior, however,
most transient signals cannot be used as wavelet basis functions since they resemble exponentially damped sinusoids and
do not possess a zero mean. The wavelet basis used in this paper is the db5 wavelet defined by Daubechies [9] that has
the scaling function and translation function shown in Figure 3(a), and 3(b) respectively.
                                        Scaling Function phi                                          Translation Function psi
                   1.2                                                             1.5


                     1
                                                                                     1

                   0.8

                                                                                   0.5
                   0.6


                   0.4                                                               0


                   0.2
                                                                                   -0.5

                     0

                                                                                    -1
                   -0.2


                   -0.4                                                            -1.5
                          0     1   2    3    4     5     6    7      8      9            0   1   2      3         4   5   6     7      8    9



                               Figure 3 – Daubechies wavelet n =5 (a) Scaling Function (b) Translation Function




                                                                                                                                     Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795   145
  Note that scaling function strongly resembles the blast signature for the HE and "Type A CB signals" shown in Figure 3a
  and 3b, as well as the short pulse preceding the main blast in Figure 2c. Shown in Figure 4, the multiresolution filter
  bank using low pass and high pass wavelet filters to decompose an input signal into different frequency bands is used to
  implement the DWT. At each level of decomposition, the high pass filter defined in (2) produces the detail
  information, Dn , while the low pass filter associated with the scaling function in (1) produces the coarse
  approximations An . Often referred to as the Mallat algorithm a process of successive lowpass and high pass filtering of
  the input signal is used to implement the DWT [12]. The resulting banks of dyadic multirate filters are used to split up
  the input signal’s frequency components into different subbands at each decomposition level, each with a subset of
  frequencies spanning half of the original frequency band. If the original signal is sampled at a frequency of fs Hz, then
  the output of the first high pass filter which is the first detail coefficient D1 , captures the band of frequencies between
  fs/2 and fs/4. This reduces the uncertainty in the frequency by a factor of 2 as the frequency resolution doubles. In the
  same manner, the highpass filter in the second stage would capture signal components with a bandwidth between fs/4
  and fs/8, and so on. In this way, an arbitrary resolution in frequency can be obtained. Since the input signal at each
  stage of decomposition contains the highest frequency equivalent to twice that of the output stages, it can be sampled at
  half the original sampling frequency, thus discarding half the samples with no loss of information. This decimation by 2
  halves the time resolution of the entire signal as the input signal is represented by half of the total number of samples and
  effectively doubles the scale.




                      Figure 4 – A Multirate Filter Bank used as a Five Level Wavelet Decomposition Tree




       2.2 Wavelet Features for Classification

  Figures 5 (a-c) show blast waves from the three unique artillery rounds of interest, followed by four signals derived from
  the multiresolution decomposition shown in Figure 4; the coefficients at level 5 and detail signals at level 5, 4, and 3
  respectively. The proposed feature space is comprised of primitives derived from the normalized energy distributions
  within the details at level 5, 4, and 3, centered about the maximum value of the blast wave. In addition, values derived
  from the coefficients at level 5 a fourth feature is obtained. Features such as the rise time for the blast wave and the low
  frequency content found within the acoustic signals is least attenuated over long propagation distances when compared
  to some of the predominant features initially identified for discrimination. From the plots in Figure 5, it can be seen that
  at varying levels of decomposition beyond level 2, differences in the energy distribution within the details differ
  dramatically prior to the max peak pressure of each blast with respect to energy distributions after the blast has occurred.
  Furthermore, this energy is not amplitude dependant as the baseband signal is filtered by the scaling function and only
  the high-frequency noise components are captured within the details after decomposition.
             Let t P denote the sample time where the maximum peak over pressure of a blast wave occurs. Let t0 = α ∗ f s
  designate an integration start time, and t F = β ∗ f s denote integration stop time. We restrict the values α , β such that
   0 < α , β ≤ 1 for t P > t0 and t F > t0 such that t P , t 0 , t F ∈ Ι . Define the energy distribution within the details just prior to
  the max peak pressure as



146   Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795
                                                           ∑
                                                           t
                                                       1 P
                                              D k− =          Dk (n )                (3)
                                                       N n =t
                                                                   0

where N = t P − t 0 . Define the energy distribution at the point immediately after the max pressure occurs as

                                                           ∑
                                                               t
                                                       1 F
                                              D k+ =         Dk (m )                 (4)
                                                       M m=t
                                                                       P

where M = t F − t P . Since D k− , D k+ > 0 we are able to define analytic features xDk ∈ ℜk using the ratio of the
normalized energy distributions within the details.

                                                                    D− 
                                              x Dk = log 10          k 
                                                                                     (5)
                                                                    D+ 
                                                                    k 
The first 3-tuple of the features space consists of xD5 , xD 4 , xD3 which we propose are useful to characterize the artillery
blasts of interest. A fourth feature is derived from the wavelet coefficient obtained at level 5. We integrate the
magnitude of the area for the coefficients between the start and stop times defined for the details




                                                               ∑
                                                                  t   
                                                        1 F
                                      A5 AREA = log10         A5 (k )            (6).
                                                       K              
                                                         k =t             0   



Figure 6 (a-f) shows all permutations of 2-D subspaces for the entire set of data collected at Dugway Proving Ground
that was used to train and initially benchmark the performance of a neural network classifier. An ‘x’ is used to indicate
features derived from the CB blasts while the corresponding HE feature points are depicted with a ‘.’ Note that the
resulting subspaces reveal a high degree of separability, notwithstanding the 540 – 1660m variability in range at which
the data was acquired.



                                        3. NEURAL NETWORK CLASSIFIER

    Neural networks are a powerful tool used to solve difficult classification (mapping) problems with complex decision
regions that are often required to ensure separability between classes and a proven ability to realize non-linear
discriminant functions.. The use of neural networks for classification is well documented and the requirements for
training are well known. The standard multilayer feedforward neural network shown in Figure 7 was chosen due to its
ability to learn mappings of any complexity, provided that the number of hidden layer neurons is sufficient to
accommodate the number of separable regions that are required to solve a particular classification problem. In general,
the network contains N i inputs, N h hidden layer neurons and N O output layer neurons with no interconnections within
a single layer. In the three-layer network shown, the connection weight between the i th input and j th hidden layer
neuron will be denoted as wij and v jk will be used to denote the connection weight between the j th neuron in the
hidden layer and k th output layer neuron. A bias for the j th hidden layer neuron is denoted as b j and the bias for the
                                                                                                     [
k th output neuron is b̂k . x p denotes the set of P , N -tuple feature vectors x n ∈ ℜ N , x p = x1p , x2p ,   K, x ] used to
                                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                                    N
discriminate between the different classes of artillery.




                                                                                                 Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795   147
                                        Figure 5a –HE Signal and Wavelet Decomposition to Level 5




                                Figure 5b –Type A CB: Original Signal and Wavelet Decomposition to Level 5




                                Figure 5c – Type B CB: Original Signal and Wavelet Decomposition to Level 5




148   Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795
                                                log A5 Area vs log D3 Power Ratio                                                                           log A5 Area vs log D4 Power Ratio
                         1.5                                                                                                     1.5



                           1                                                                                                       1



                         0.5                                                                                                     0.5
   log D3 Power Ratio




                                                                                                            log D4 Power Ratio
                           0                                                                                                       0



                        -0.5                                                                                                     -0.5



                          -1                                                                                                       -1



                        -1.5                                                                                                     -1.5
                               1   1.5      2           2.5        3      3.5       4       4.5         5                               1   1.5         2         2.5        3      3.5         4       4.5    5
                                                              log A5 Area                                                                                               log A5 Area


                                                log A5 Area vs log D5 Power Ratio                                                                      log D5 Power Ratio vs log D4 Power Ratio
                         1.5                                                                                                     1.5



                           1                                                                                                       1



                         0.5                                                                                                     0.5
   log D5 Power Ratio




                                                                                                            log D4 Power Ratio




                           0                                                                                                       0



                        -0.5                                                                                                     -0.5



                          -1                                                                                                       -1



                        -1.5                                                                                                     -1.5
                               1   1.5      2           2.5        3      3.5       4       4.5         5                           -1.5          -1          -0.5            0         0.5         1         1.5
                                                              log A5 Area                                                                                            log D5 Power Ratio


                                          log D5 Power Ratio vs log D3 Power Ratio                                                                     log D4 Power Ratio vs log D3 Power Ratio
                        1.5                                                                                                      1.5



                          1                                                                                                        1



                        0.5                                                                                                      0.5
 log D3 Power Ratio




                                                                                                            log D3 Power Ratio




                          0
                                                                                                                                   0


                        -0.5
                                                                                                                                 -0.5


                         -1
                                                                                                                                   -1


                        -1.5
                          -1.5       -1          -0.5            0         0.5          1         1.5                            -1.5
                                                        log D5 Power Ratio                                                         -1.5           -1          -0.5            0         0.5         1         1.5
                                                                                                                                                                     log D4 Power Ratio




Figure 6 – 2D Feature Spaces derived from the “known” DPG data set (a) A5area vs. xD3 (b) A5area vs. xD4 (c) A5area vs. xD4 (d)
xD5 vs. xD4 (e) xD5 vs. xD3 and (f) xD4 vs. xD3



                                                                                                                                                                                      Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795       149
                                                                                 b1                          b̂1
                                                              wij                              v jk
                                        x1                                                                                 out1

                                        x2                                                                                 out 2

                                        x3                                                                                 out 3


                                                                                                                   bˆN 0
                                       xN                                                                                  out N 0
                                                    Ni                      Nh                               NO

                                                Figure 7– Standard Multilayer Feedforward Neural Network


     The input layer units or “neurons” propagate signals to the hidden layer but do not perform any computations.
  Neurons in the hidden layer and the output layer compute their response by taking a weighted sum signals from the
  previous layer plus a bias, and then passing the sum through an activation function. For example, the output of the j th
  neuron in the hidden layer upon the presentation of the p th input pattern x p is given by out Pj = f net Pj                       ( ) where
                 ∑
                 N
      net Pj =          wij xiP + b j , and f is an activation function, that was chosen to be the sigmoid function
                 i =1

                                                                    f (net ) =
                                                                                      1
                                                                                                      (7)
                                                                                  1 + e −net

      The neural network classifier used to discriminate between HE and CB artillery blasts was trained using the
  generalized delta rule or back propagation algorithm. The algorithm sequentially adjusts the interconnection weights
  within the network, subsequent to the application of all patterns in a training set, a routine commonly referred to as an
  epoch. In general, when an input pattern x p from a training set is presented to the network, it produces and output that
  is different from the target value, say d P . The error for the specific pattern is defined as the squared

                          ∑(                )
                          N
              1 0 P              2
  error E P =        d k − out kP .             An unconstrained nonlinear optimization is performed to minimize the total error
              2 k =1
  function of the network

                                                                          ∑ ()
                                                                            P
                                                                E (w) =           EP w                 (8)
                                                                           k =1
      through the incremental computation of the gradient of the error in equation (8), and successive adjustment of the
  interconnection weights so as to achieve the global minimum error corresponding to E (w) = 0 .


                                                                          4. RESULTS

    Features were extracted from both data sets using the DWT as described in section 3, and the 4-tuple feature vector
             [                          ]
  x = xDP 5 , xDP 4 , xDP 3 , A5PAREA was constructed according to equations (5) and (6). Experiments were then conducted to
       p

  measure the separability of the feature space and benchmark the performance of the proposed neural network classifier.


150        Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795
The architecture shown in Figure 7, consisting of a single hidden layer neuron was trained using 22 randomly selected
vectors from a total of 461 signatures made available from the data collection exercise at DPG. The training set
comprised of 11 samples of HE data and 11 samples of Type A CB rounds collected at each of the 3 sensor sites. The
goal of the training process was to obtain a neural network output equal to 0 when the sample features presented to the
input layer corresponded to an HE round and an output value of 1 when features from a CB round are applied. The
network was trained such that the total error in equation (8) was less than 5e-3 and a learning rate of 0.1 was used. When
tested against the remaining 439 signatures, the networked correctly classified 100% of the remaining 225 CB blasts and
misclassified a total of 4 out 214 (or 98.1%) of the remaining HE rounds, for an overall performance of 99.1%. The
rounds were classified as CB when the output from the sigmoid activation function in equation (7) was greater than ½
and HE otherwise.
    In a subsequent experiment, a neural network consisting of 4 hidden layer neurons was then trained using the entire
dataset from the DPG test; a total of 236 Type A CB rounds and 225 HE signatures. The network was then tested
against the data collected by NCPA at YPG. The network correctly classified 165 of the total of 166 CB rounds and
misclassified a total of 6 out of 57 HE rounds, for a rate of 99.4% and 89.5% respectively. Neural networks consisting
of up to 3 hidden layer neurons could not match or surpass the classification performance provided with the architecture
comprised of 4 hidden layer neurons. A third experiment was undertaking utilizing the “so-called” blind data from DPG
for which truth data was provided by the test facility. The data was tested using a neural network trained with 4 hidden
layer neurons and against all the initial DPG data that was considered to be “not blind”. The results obtained for these
blasts provided correct classification results of 98.3% of all the CB and 95.7% of all the HE, providing further
confidence in the neural network and the results of the classification. However, the same results were obtained when
training a neural network comprised of 5 or more hidden layer neurons. Once again, the rounds were classified as CB
when the output from the sigmoid activation function (7) produced a value greater than ½ and HE otherwise. A
summary of the neural network performance is shown in Table 1 below.




       Experiment       Training Data            Test Data            Classification         Percentage
           #
           1            11 CB (DPG)           225 CB (DPG)            225 CB / 0 HE            100%
                        11 HE (DPG)           214 HE (DPG)            210 HE / 4 CB           98.1 %
             2          236 CB (DPG)          166 CB (YPG)            165 CB / 1 HE           99.4 %
                        225 HE (DPG)           57 HE (YPG)            51 HE / 6 CB            89.5 %
             3          236 CB (Blind)        230 CB (Blind)          226 CB / 4 HE           98.3 %
                        225 HE (Blind)        184 HE (Blind)          174 HE / 8 CB           95.7 %

                                   Table 1 - Summary of Classification performance results


                                                  5. CONCLUSION

     In this paper, feature extraction methods based on the discrete wavelet transform and multiresolution analysis
facilitate the development of a robust classification algorithm that affords reliable discrimination between conventional
and simulated chemical/biological artillery rounds via acoustic signals produced during detonation. Amplitude
dependant features provide the basis for previously developed discrimination algorithms, which vary dramatically due to
signal attenuation and distortion resulting from various propagation effects. Measurements from multiple sensors can be
used to obtain range information to a blast under these circumstances, which in turn maintains the potential for a high
level of correct classification. In general, it was noted that when the distances from the detonation point to disparate
sensor exceeds 1km; the probability of correct classification degrades dramatically, even though visual cues that can be
used to exploit class specific attributes are still noticeable within the signature data.
          The non-stationary, transient and often oscillatory nature of artillery blast signals may be characterized
efficiently with wavelet bases that successfully capture the time-frequency distribution of such signal components.
Wavelets are better suited for analyzing transient signals, as they are well localized in time and in frequency, and are
able to take into account the scale of discrete signal components. To this end, the wavelet transform has been shown to


                                                                                                Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795   151
  provide a scalable time-frequency depiction of blast signatures and has revealed details that are not readily detectable
  using conventional signal processing techniques. Utilizing the idea of multiresolution analysis provided by the discrete
  wavelet transform, we were able to break the original signature into subband components thereby removing the higher
  frequency noise features and creating two sets of coefficients at varying levels of decomposition. These coefficients are
  obtained each time the signal is passed through a lowpass and highpass filter bank whose impulse response is derived
  from Daubechies db5 wavelet. Distinct features are obtained through the process of isolating the details of the higher
  oscillatory components of the signature (i.e. characteristic whining of the shrapnel for HE rounds and weak under
  pressure for CB rounds). The ratio of the energy contained within the details at varying levels of decomposition is
  sufficient in discriminating between the vast majorities of artillery blasts.
            The discrete wavelet transform has been successfully employed to extract unique, disjoint feature sets that
  remain consistent for a given class of round and do not degrade dramatically with long-range propagation. Classification
  results using a neural network trained on such attributes show consistently reliable discrimination of CB artillery rounds
  that surpasses 98%, even when the network is trained on data acquired during different field test experiments. In
  addition, the algorithms developed herein allow for the discrimination of base ejection type rounds, which were not part
  of the original training set used to train the neural network.


                                                 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

     The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance Chris Reiff from the Army Research Lab for his assistance in
  providing data sets from the Disparate Sensor Integration test at Dugway Proving Grounds, and Amnon Birenzvige and
  Dave Sickenberger at the Edgewood Chemical and Biological Center.


                                                        REFERENCES

  1.  H.E. Bass, ”Aero Acoustic Blast Classification Study (ACBS)”, Interim Report for contract 95-F139300-000, January, 1996
  2.  Birenzvige, A., Sickenberger, D., and Reyes, F., “Disparate Sensor Integration Program Description and Preliminary Data
      Analysis”, Report ECBC-TR-251, Edgewood Chemical Biological Center, September 2002.
  3. Birenzvige, A., Redmond, R, Water, P. “High Energy and Chemical Blast Analysis”, Report ECBC-TR-310, Edgewood
      Chemical Biological Center, August 2003.
  4. Birenzvige, A., Sickenberger, D., Reyes, F. Reiff, C., Gonski, D., “Force Protection: Early Detection of Chemical/Biological
      Attack Using Disparate Sensors, ECBC-TR-271, April 2003.
  5. Reiff, C. and Gonski, D., “Discrimination of Chemical/Biological vs. High Explosive Artillery Rounds Using Acoustic and
      Seismic Data Fusion”, Poster Presentation, 23rd Army Science Conference, Orlando, Fl. November 2002.
  6. Reiff, C., Farques, M., Gonski, D., “Discrimination of Chemical/Biological vs. High Explosive Artillery Rounds Using Acoustic
      and Seismic Data Fusion”, SPIE, Fl. November 2002.
  7. Farques, M.P., “Discrimination between Chemical/Biological and High Explosive Seismic Signatures”, Naval Postgraduate
      School, Technical Report NPS-EC-03-002, November 2002.
  8. Sickenberger,D., Birenzvige, A., Reyes, F., “Use of Disparate Sensors for the Detection of Chemical and Biological Events”,
      Proc. SPIE conference on Unattended Ground Sensor Technologies and Applications IV, Aug. 2002, pp. 213-224.
  9. Daubechies, I., 1992, Ten Lectures on Wavelets: SIAM, Capital City Press.
  10. United States Army., 1994, “Chemical and Biological Contamination Avoidance”, FM No. 3-3/FM No.11-17 Headquarters
      Department of the Army, Washington, DC
  11. Vetterli, M., Kovacevic, J., “Wavelets and Subband Coding”, Prentice Hall, NJ 1995
  12. Mallet, S., “A theory for Multiresolution Signal Decomposition: The Wavelet Representation.”, IEEE Transactions on Pattern
      Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Vol. 11. No. 7. July 1989.




152    Proc. of SPIE Vol. 5795
