    Mortar and Artillery Variants Classification by Exploiting
            Characteristics of the Acoustic Signature
                      Myron E. Hohil, David Grasing, Sachi Desai, and Amir Morcos
                       1
                           US Army RDECOM, Picatinny Arsenal, NJ 07806
          Email: mhohil@pica.army.mil; david.grasing@pica.army.mil; sdesai@pica.army.mil;
                                     amorcos@pica.army.mil;


                                                  Abstract

         Feature extraction methods based on the discrete wavelet transform and multiresolution
         analysis facilitate the development of a robust classification algorithm that reliably
         discriminates mortar and artillery variants via acoustic signals produced during the
         launch/impact events. Utilizing acoustic sensors to exploit the sound waveform
         generated from the blast for the identification of mortar and artillery variants. Distinct
         characteristics arise within the different mortar variants because varying HE mortar
         payloads and related charges emphasize concussive and shrapnel effects upon impact
         employing varying magnitude explosions. The different mortar variants are characterized
         by variations in the resulting waveform of the event. The waveform holds various
         harmonic properties distinct to a given mortar/artillery variant that through advanced
         signal processing techniques can employed to classify a given set. The DWT and other
         readily available signal processing techniques will be used to extract the predominant
         components of these characteristics from the acoustic signatures at ranges exceeding
         2km. Exploiting these techniques will help develop a feature set highly independent of
         range, providing discrimination based on acoustic elements of the blast wave. Highly
         reliable discrimination will be achieved with a feed-forward neural network classifier
         trained on a feature space derived from the distribution of wavelet coefficients, frequency
         spectrum, and higher frequency details found within different levels of the
         multiresolution decomposition. The process that will be described herein extends current
         technologies, which emphasis multi modal sensor fusion suites to provide such situational
         awareness. A two fold problem of energy consumption and line of sight arise with the
         multi modal sensor suites. The process described within will exploit the acoustic
         properties of the event to provide variant classification as added situational awareness to
         the solider.

         Keywords: Neural Network, Artillery, Impact, Launch, Statistical Analysis, Acoustic
         Sensors, and Artillery


                                           1. INTRODUCTION

     A network of acoustic sensors can be used to detect and localize artillery launch and/or impact events,
and can provide a capability to classify the types of events that have occurred in a specified region provide
both warning and identification of threats found in the area. The added information integrated into the
common operating picture would assist field commanders to (more) accurately plan and execute measures
that must be taken in order to ensure the proper actions for a mission. Such a warning system would also
help reduce the time-consuming, manpower intensive and dangerous tasks associated with identifying the
events, allowing a field commander to make rapid and accurate judgments that insure greater safety and
minimize danger for the soldiers.



             Unmanned/Unattended Sensors and Sensor Networks IV, edited by Edward M. Carapezza,
               Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736, 67360J, (2007) · 0277-786X/07/$18 · doi: 10.1117/12.738185


                                        Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-1
     The reliability associated with using acoustic sensor technologies to discriminate between artillery
variants/types using features that remain robust over long-range wave propagation, firing time, and
detonation point (air/ground) are developed and discussed herein. The results described are based on an
analysis conducted using acoustic signature data collected during a data collection exercise in the Spring of
2005. The artillery blast data was collected at YUMA Proving Ground (YPG) on 07-11 March 2005 in a
field test experiment conducted by the Acoustic Center of Excellence (ACOE) from ARDEC (Picatinny
Arsenal). The purpose of the experiment was to gather artillery and mortar data and subsequently
investigate whether launch events could be distinguished from impact events using acoustic sensor
technologies. The field test included the launch and detonation of several variants of artillery, comprising
of various rounds and included mortars; High Explosive (HE) variants. The data set comprised of 52 IM
event signatures and 125 LA event signatures collected using microphones emplaced at two sensors sites,
S1 and S2, shown in Figure 1. S1 was located approximately 300m from the firing position, while S2 was
emplaced 1000m from the firing position and 700m from the impact zone.


          A C O E D A T A C O L L E C T I O N E X E R C IS E


          A r t il le r y L a u n c h S it e

          D e t o n a t i o n /I m p a c t S it e




                                                                                                             700m
          A c o u s tic S e n s o r S ite                                                      m
                                                                                          00
                                                                                     15


                                                                                       1000m
                                                                                                            S2
                                                         300m


                                                         S1



            Figure 1 –Layout of Sensor Emplacement at Yuma Proving Grounds for Data Collection 1.


     A second data collection exercise was conducted in January 2006 at Yuma Proving Grounds. The
purpose of this data collection was to enhance the acoustic signature library. The acoustic recordings
collected added a new class of mortars to the data base, primarily launches. The data collection also
allowed us to extend the ranges of the acoustic microphone to provide greater standoff distance for
classification. Four acoustic sensors were emplaced by the ACOE from ARDEC at sensor sites S1-S4 with
ranges varying from 750m to 2000m from the firing position, shown in Figure 3.

                                ACOE DATA COLLECTION EXERCISE
                                                                             S3              S2        S1
                                Artillery Launch Site
                                                                     1000m




                                Detonation/Impact Site

                                Acoustic Sensor Site
                                                                                        0m




                                                                             S4
                                                                                     125



                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                00
                                                                                              15
                                                                              750m




                                                                                               2500m



  Figure 2 –Layout of Sensor Emplacement at Yuma Proving Grounds for Data Collection 2.




                                                    Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-2
   A third data collection exercise was conducted between May 31st and June 1st 2006 at Yuma Proving
Grounds. The purpose of this data collection was two fold, first to increase the number of acoustic
signatures in our library to continue to build our database. The second portion of the experiment was to
conduct additional analysis of the influence of range variance on sound propagation from the acoustic
source and the affects on the acoustic characteristics to develop a more robust feature space. Over the two-
day data collection the assorted lots of mortar rounds were fired at various distances, ranging from 1000m-
7500m. The air temperature was significantly higher from previous data collections, (1000-1060
Fahrenheit). Testing occurred under clear skies from the period of 0900-1500hrs. Figures 3 and 4 show
the sensor deployment schemes for the two-day data collection are shown with approximate distances for
the three acoustic sensors that were emplaced by the ACOE from ARDEC; S1, S2, and S3. The distances
from the firing point and impact zones to the sensor sites are shown in figures 3 and 4.
   A C O E D A T A C O L L E C T I O N E X E R C IS E
                                                                   S1               S2                               S3

   A r t ille r y L a u n c h S it e

   D e t o n a t io n /Im p a c t S it e                     m
                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                   90



                                                                                m
   A c o u s t ic S e n s o r S it e
                                                            1210




                                                                                                                          1100m
                                                                                              70


                                                                            00
                                                                           22




                                                                     1000m                              6000m

                                                                                    7000m




            Figure 3 – Layout of Sensor Emplacement at Yuma Proving Grounds May 31st, 2006 for Data Collection 3.



 ACOE DATA COLLECTION EXERCISE
                                                                           S1                                   S2                S3

 Artillery Launch Site

 Detonation/Impact Site
                                                                       m




                                                                                              m                 m
                                                                                            90                80
                                                                   1860




 Acoustic Sensor Site                                                                                                                  1100m
                                                                                         70                 75




                                                                            2600m                                4900m


                                                                                             7500m
           Figure 4 – Layout of Sensor Emplacement at Yuma Proving Grounds June 1st, 2006 for Data Collection 3.

    Figure 5 shows three typical acoustic signatures for launches and impacts from various ranges to the
sensors. The most notable attributes within each type of blast are readily identified. High frequency
precursors that occur prior to the main blast of an IM type event are shown in Figure 5b. These precursors
are attributed to various explosive and concussive properties within the blast, which degrade with long-
range propagation. Note that the high frequency precursors are absent prior to the main blast as shown in




                                                        Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-3
Figure 5. In this work, we identify range invariant features found within the multiresolution decomposition
of the corresponding signatures in an attempt to further promote disparate sensor technology for artillery
event discrimination. The subsequent development of a feature space representation for classification is
based upon data obtained during the three series of data collections at YPG We show that details extracted
via different levels of decomposition produce repeatable properties that can be processed and combined to
ensure reliable discrimination between these events with various caliber of artillery at varying ranges.

                                                                  VyiIg C




       -D.7

       -D.4




       aS

         0

       -D.5



                                                            I-S               2                                 S




       D.5


 C.)     0

       -D.5



                                                                              2               2fl               S




 Figure 5 – Acoustic Signatures from YPG (a) Mortar launch recorded at S1, (b) Mortar impact recorded from S2, (c)
                                         Mortar launch recorded at S2.




                                          2. DATA PROCESSING
     Statistical analytical methods are used as a basis to identify distinct, disjoint feature sets that remain
consistent for a given class of round, and do not degrade dramatically with long-range propagation. The
complex, non-stationary response of the signatures to be analyzed, which are categorically poor candidates
for feature extraction and segmentation via Fourier analysis or the short-time Fourier Transform. On the
other hand, the non-stationary, transient and often oscillatory nature of these signals is well represented
with a temporal representation identifying the acoustic baseband signature and developing a series of non-
amplitude characteristics describing a given acoustic blast wave. Exploiting the transient nature of the
source surface wave providing a scalable time representation, we process the raw data into manageable
sizes.
     After an impulsive event is detected, a three-second snippet is taken around the maximum. Various
preprocessing steps are performed on the data. The first step is to remove any DC offset. The recorded
acoustic signatures are down sampled. For training purposes it was convenient to convert the 32768
samples/sec to 8192 samples/sec. Although there was a small loss in information (particularly in the rapid
onset as the acoustic wave first passes over the microphone) it was deemed that the benefits of working
with less data outweighed any corresponding loss of information. The data was also normalization by
scaling the recording to make the largest peak equal to unity.




                                         Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-4
         The original data cuts were obtained by first estimating a noise floor and accepting a recording
when the recording exceeded some dynamic threshold. The recording is taken 1 second from the maximum
peak in the characteristic N-wave and 2 seconds forward from the same point providing the data snipet.
Many standard approaches (e.g. the median absolute difference technique) are well know in the art and can
be used for impulse detection. After a recording has been cut it is desirable to find a consistent reference
point. Explosions generally have a characteristic N wave shape consisting of the following; a rapid onset
followed by a rapid decrease of pressure until reaching a negative peak then slowly increasing back to zero.


              2.1 DERIVING DISTINCTIVE ACOUSTIC CHARACTERISTIC’S
      Utilizing statistical analytical properties a series of distinctive characteristic elements extracted from
acoustic signatures developing a series of statistical methods that provide representation of the various
phenomena occurring in the temporal domain. These derived features describe the various characteristics
of surface wave generated by the explosive blast event at the launch of an artillery or mortar shell.
      The acoustic signature generated by the expulsion of an artillery/mortar round out of a gun tube during
launch divides into a series of temporal based events. The natural sequence of a round being launched is
acoustically described by the representative signature recorded by the microphone. The signature divided
into a series of events based on the characteristic N-wave generated by the charge used to launch the
artillery/mortar round. The blast envelope is broken into a series of lobes describing the dramatic change in
pressure as the explosion concludes with some minimal burn at the tail end as the signature fades out.
      The signature is broken into the following series of intervals using the N-shaped envelope as
represented as p[n] where n is the number of samples from the reference point defined in the previous
section (first zero crossing after the initial peak pressure), and that zero crossing is noted. The lobes of the
blast are defined by the time intervals [τ1 τ2] and [τ3 τ4]. The reference point was chosen to be the first zero
crossing after the initial peak pressure, essentially the middle leg of the characteristic N-wave. The ratio of
the energy in the interval [τ1, τ2] to the energy in the interval [τ3, τ4] generates three key features based on
the equation defined by eq.1.

                                                                        2
                                                      ∑n=τ p[n]
                                                          τ2

                                              f13 ≡            1
                                                                        2
                                                      ∑n=τ p[n]
(1)                                                       τ4
                                                               3



Pressure squared roll off. For a given interval [τ1, τ2] and constant α (0 < α < 1) this feature is defined as
follows: The time index τ that makes the energy of p in the interval [τ1, τ1+τ] equal to α times the energy
in the interval [τ1, τ2] is taken as the feature
f14 = ∆⋅τ. ∆ is also defined to be 1/(sampling rate) and is in several expressions to make the actual
sampling rate used less relevant defined by eq.2 and eq.3.

(2)
                                                 f14 = ∆ ⋅τ

For τ satisfying:
                                                      2                           2
                                ∑ τ p[n] = α ∑ τ p[n]
                                     τ 1 +τ                        τ2
(3)
                                     n= 1                          n= 1
The slope of a least squares linear fit to pressure over the interval [τ1, τ2]:




                                          Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-5
(4)                                                    lS np − S n S p
                                           f15 ≡                         2
                                                        lS nn − S n
Each of the elements is defined in equations 5-9 over the defined time interval with various points on the
characteristic N-wave.

                                          l = τ 2 − τ 1 + 1,
(5)                                                τ2
(6)                                       S n = ∑ ( ∆ n ),
                                                  n =τ 1
                                                       τ2
(7)                                       S nn = ∑ ( ∆ n ) 2 ,
                                                   n =τ 1
                                                   τ2
(8)                                       S p = ∑ p [ n ],
                                                  n =τ 1
                                                       τ2
(9)                                       S np = ∑ ∆ ⋅ n ⋅ p [ n ]
                                                   n =τ 1


The centroid of pressure squared over the time interval [τ1, τ2]:

                                                   τ2

                                                  ∑τ ∆ ( n − τ ) ⋅ p [ n ]
                                                  n=
                                                                     1
                                                                                 2


(10)                            f 21 ≡ C ≡              1
                                                            τ2

                                                            ∑τ p [ n ]
                                                            n=
                                                                             2

                                                                 1


     The feature space proposed is comprised of primitives derived from the normalized energy
distributions within the normalized original signature, centered about the maximum value of the blast wave
that results in various power distributions characteristic to the event. Feature extraction methods yield
differences that become visible with the varying energy distribution found within the events, including the
energy distributions over the given period while remaining amplitude independent.




                                     3.     FEATURE OPTIMIZATION
          It was desired to determine the optimal set of features and corresponding parameters. It is desired
to obtain a small number of features that yields the most amount of information. A brute force search
quickly becomes computationally prohibitive as the number of features increases. The approach taken was
to define a measure of fitness and search over all the features and parameters for a single feature. The
feature and corresponding parameters that yields the greatest measure of fitness is then recorded.
Subsequent features are then added to the existing set, and the merit of each combination is evaluated, and
new feature/parameters are selected in turn. We do not forbid the possibility that the same feature with a
different data cut is best (i.e. features can occur multiple times). This process is repeated until the desired
number of features is reached (in our case 6 features were selected).
          In order to evaluate the usefulness of each set of features a metric is needed. The metric chosen
was the Mahalanobis distance. For the two class case with means, µ1 and µ2 and pooled covariance Σ given
by:




                                          Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-6
(11)
                                              ( N C1 − 1)Σ C1 + ( N C 2 − 1)Σ C 2
                                    Σ≡
                                                       N C1 + N C 2 − 2
The Mahalanobis distance is defined as:

(12)                            d (c1, c 2) ≡ ( µ1 − µ 2 )T ⋅ Σ −1 ⋅ ( µ1 − µ 2 )

For each possible set of features and parameters, the Mahalanobis distance between each combination of
classes is computed. The minimum of these Mahalanobis distances are taken as a measure of fitness for a
given set of feature/parameters to then proceed to the next step of classification.



                   Priiiu& timi •r'i ritici                    Priiiu& rolloa                   Uniir rigriiilon to priiur


            0.8                                                                         0.8


                                                                                          0

                                                                                        -0.8



              -0      U      U 04              08                                         -02       U       0.2      0.4      0.8
                          TimE]                                     Time Es]                             Time Es]

                     C ntroidofpr    ur 2                  Pressure2 time area ratios            Pressure2 time area ratios



            0.8

                                                                                                                     L

            -0.8


              —l
                             U.:      0.4      0.8                                                                            0.8
                          Time Es]                                  Time Es]                             Time Es]




Figure 6 – A representation of the derived, defined feature space across an acoustic signature of high-explosive event..




                                                Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-7
                                                                                    Preuuure2rolloffs              Linearreqressionto pressure




                 0.1    0.16     0.2      0.26     P.S                       0.24   0.26 0.28       0.3   0.32
                               Time Eu]                                                 Time Eu]

                       Ce ntru id of p reusu re2                         1pPmuuum2 time area ratios
                                                                  16

                                                              0 10
                                                              r
                                                                  6.
                                                                  -6

                                                                       0.2     0.22 0.24 0.28 0.28        0.3     0.1 0.16 0.2 0.26 0.3 0.36
                                                                                        Time Eu]                                Time Eu]




          Figure 7 – A zoomed representation of the derived, defined feature space providing greater detail.


                                                   4. NEURAL NETWORK CLASSIFIER
    Neural networks have become a powerful tool for solving difficult classification (mapping) problems
with a proven ability to realize non-linear discriminant functions and complex decision regions that are
often required to ensure separability between classes. The use of neural networks for classification is well
documented and convergence requirements for training are well known. The standard multilayer
feedforward neural network shown in Figure 8 was chosen due to its ability to learn mappings of any
complexity, provided that the number of hidden layer neurons is sufficient to accommodate the number of
separable regions that are required to solve a particular classification problem. In general, the network
contains Ni inputs, N h hidden layer neurons and N O output layer neurons with no interconnections within
a single layer. In the three-layer network shown, the connection weight between the i th input and j th
hidden layer neuron will be denoted as wij and vij will be used to denote the connection weight between
the j th neuron in the hidden layer and k th output layer neuron. A bias for the j th hidden layer neuron is
denoted as b j and the bias for the k th output neuron is b̂k . x p denotes the set of P , N -tuple feature
                                 [                        ]
vectors x n ∈ ℜ N , x p = x1p , x2p , K , xNp used to discriminate between the different classes of artillery.

                                                                                             b1                   b̂1
                                                                       wij                                 v jk
                                 x1                                                                                                   out 1

                                x2                                                                                                    out 2

                                x3                                                                                                    out 3


                                                                                                                        bˆN 0
                               xN                                                                                                    out N 0
                                                     Ni                                    Nh                     NO
              Figure 8– Standard Multilayer Feedforward Neural Network.




                                                          Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-8
    The input layer units or “neurons” propagate signals to the hidden layer but do not perform any
computations. Neurons in the hidden layer and the output layer compute their response by taking a
weighted sum signals from the previous layer plus a bias, and then passing the sum through an activation
function. For example, the output of the j th neuron in the hidden layer upon the presentation of the p th

                                        ( )
                                                                 N
input pattern x p is given by out Pj = f net Pj where net Pj =   ∑ w x + b , and f is an activation function,
                                                                 i =1
                                                                           P
                                                                        ij i   j


that was chosen to be the sigmoid function
                                                          2
                                            f ( x) =            −1      (13)
                                                       1 + e -x
      The neural network classifier used to discriminate between variant artillery and mortar round types.
The neural network was trained using the generalized delta rule or back propagation algorithm. The
algorithm sequentially adjusts the interconnection weights within the network, subsequent to the
application of all patterns in a training set, a routine commonly referred to as an epoch. In general, when an
input pattern x p from a training set is presented to the network, it produces and output that is different
from the target value, say d P . The error for the specific pattern is defined as the squared
                N

               ∑(             )
              1 0 P              2
error E P =          d k − out kP . An unconstrained nonlinear optimization performed to minimize the total
              2 k =1
error function of the network
                                                       P
                                           E (w) =   ∑ E (w)
                                                     k =1
                                                            P           (14)

through the incremental computation of the gradient of the error in equation (14), and successive
adjustment of the interconnection weights so as to achieve the global minimum error corresponding
to E (w) = 0 . In this implementation the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm was used. To train the network
the error function is defined as the sum of error functions defined above for all input/output pairs of the
training set. Levenberg-Marquardt is hybrid technique that utilizes a parameter that changes during training
to vary between steps defined by the Gauss-Newton algorithm and standard gradient descent.


                                                 5. RESULTS

                                        EXPERIMENT 1 RESULTS
    Features were extracted from the data sets using standard statistical analysis tools for signal processing
as described in sections two and three, and the 6-tuple feature vector ζ               = f 1 , f 1 , f 1 , f 4 , f 5 , f 6 , was
                                                                                   p


constructed according to equations (1), (3), (4), and (10), respectively. Optimization techniques were
utilized to exploit the most robust and ideal set of features to provide maximum seperability, giving the
most amount of information. The optimization method defined a measure of fitness for each of
Experiments were then conducted to measure the separability of the feature space and benchmark the
performance of the proposed neural network classifier. The architecture of the neural network consisted of
five hidden layer neurons trained using 2/3 of randomly selected vectors from a total of 423 signatures
made available from the multiplicity of YPG exercise between March of 2005, YPG 1 and June of 2006,
YPG 3 . The neural network has six input nodes and five output nodes to separate the various rounds based
on caliber. The training set comprised of 2/3 of the total data set composed of various mortars and artillery




                                        Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-9
caliber rounds at the diverse sensor sites. When tested against the remaining 1/3 total data signatures
composed of artillery and mortars , the networked correctly classified 132 out of 141 rounds with the
correct caliber based on the launch events. The overall performance of network was 93.62% for correct
artillery and mortar variant classification; each individual round had the following classification rates, 86%
for Type A, 96% for Type B, 95% for Type C, 100% for Type D, and 77% for Type E rounds. The events
were classified as a certain round caliber when the output from the sigmoid activation function in equation
(14) was greater than 0 and less then 0 for the series of outputs giving an expression in 1 and -1 values.


                Classified        Classified       Classified      Classified         Classified Correctly
                Type A            Type B           Type C          Type D             Type E Classified

    TypeA       6                 0                1               0                  0              85.7%
    TypeB       0                 45               1               0                  1              95.7%




                                                                .
    TypeC                         1                60              2                                 95.2%
    TypeD       0                 0                0               11                 0              100%




                                                           .
    TypeB       0                 0                0               3                  10             77%

                    Figure 9– Classification Results Table to Discriminate Various Round Calibers.



                                                                         TypeB •  launch 81mm
                                                                                  launch 120mm

                          4



                          2
                                                            . >.         TypeC •

                          U

                                                                         H.




                          4
                          3



                                                                        -c    U

                                                           -2




          Figure 10– A 3-tuple Representations of Seperability of Artillery/Mortar Based on Caliber Type.


                                                6. CONCLUSIONS
    In this paper, feature extraction methods based on the statically analysis methods for acoustic signals
and temporal space analysis facilitate the development of a robust classification algorithm that affords
reliable discrimination between various calibers of artillery and mortar round types based on launch event
acoustic signatures. The acoustic signature generated by the various charges utilized to expel a round out
of a firing tube affords a series of characteristic features amplitude independent, and range independent that




                                          Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-10
can discriminate various caliber rounds. Previous methods for artillery/mortar classification based on
launch events were based on visual cues rather than remote acoustic methods, which vary on proximity to
the event and line of sight. Amplitude dependant features, which vary dramatically due to signal
attenuation and distortion resulting from various propagation effects, are minimized through the use of
signal processing techniques that exploit class specific attributes that remain constant within the signature
data and furthered through statistical analysis [4].
    The non-stationary, transient and often oscillatory nature of artillery blast signals may be represented
efficiently with a temporal base that effectively capture the time-frequency distribution of such signal
components. Classification results using a neural network trained on the feature set show reliable
discrimination of artillery and mortar events from various distances is 94% based singularly on launch
events for events between 700 - 7500 meters.


                                             REFERENCES

1.   H.E. Bass, ”Aero Acoustic Blast Classification Study (ACBS)”, Interim Report for contract 95-
     F139300-000, January, 1996
2.   Birenzvige, A., Sickenberger, D., and Reyes, F., “Disparate Sensor Integration Program Description
     and Preliminary Data Analysis”, Report ECBC-TR-251, Edgewood Chemical Biological Center,
     September 2002.
3.   Daubechies, I., 1992, Ten Lectures on Wavelets: SIAM, Capital City Press.
4.   Vetterli, M., Kovacevic, J., “Wavelets and Subband Coding”, Prentice Hall, NJ 1995
5.   Mallet, S., “A theory for Multiresolution Signal Decomposition: The Wavelet Representation.”, IEEE
     Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, Vol. 11. No. 7. July 1989.
6.   Hohil, M., Desai, S., Chang, J., “Discrimination between High Explosive and Chemical/Biological
     Artillery Using Acoustic Sensors.” Military Sensing Symposia, Laurel, MD. August 2004.




                                      Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6736 67360J-11
